1. Zhongguo Dang Dai Er Ke Za Zhi. 2009 Nov;11(11):909-12.

[Urinary leukotrience E(4) level in children with asthma].

[Article in Chinese]

He MJ(1), Chen Q, Liu JM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Jiangxi Children's Hospital, Nanchang 
330006, China.

OBJECTIVE: Cysteinyl leukotriene (CysLTs) plays an important role in airway 
inflammation and remodeling in asthma. Measurement of urinary leukotriene E(4) 
(LTE(4)) is a sensitive and noninvasive method of assaying total body CysLTs 
level. This study aimed to evaluate the clinical significance of urinary 
leukotriene E(4) (LTE(4)) in childhood asthma.
METHODS: Sixty children with acute asthma were randomly divided into montelukast 
(leukotriene receptor antagonist) treatment and conventional treatment groups (n 
= 30 each). Urinary LTE(4) levels were measured using ELISA and the airway 
resistance Rint was assessed by the lung function instrument at the acute and 
the convalescence phases. Twenty healthy children were used as the control 
group.
RESULTS: Urinary LTE(4) levels in asthmatic children at the acute and the 
convalescence phases were significantly higher than those in the control group 
(p<0.01). The urinary LTE(4) levels at the convalescence phase were 
significantly reduced compared with those at the acute phase in asthmatic 
children (p<0.01). More significantly decreased urinary LTE(4) levels were noted 
in the montelukast treatment group than the conventional treatment group at the 
convalescence phase (p<0.01). In the acute phase, there was no correlation 
between urinary LTE4 level and Rint in asthmatic children.
CONCLUSIONS: Urinary LTE(4) level is significantly increased in children with 
acute asthma. Urinary LTE(4) is a useful marker for the diagnosis of asthma and 
can be as a predictor of asthma control and marker of susceptibility to 
treatment with leukotriene receptor antagonists.

PMID: 20113659 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Int J Immunopathol Pharmacol. 2009 Oct-Dec;22(4):929-35. doi: 
10.1177/039463200902200408.

GGTI-2133, an inhibitor of geranylgeranyltransferase, inhibits infiltration of 
inflammatory cells into airways in mouse experimental asthma.

Chiba Y(1), Sato S, Misawa M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, School of Pharmacy, Hoshi University, Tokyo, 
Japan. chiba@hoshi.ac.jp

Statins have been proposed as a novel treatment of respiratory diseases 
including asthma. Although the mechanism of anti-inflammatory effect of statins 
is still unclear, an inhibition of protein prenylation by depleting the 
downstream metabolites of 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl coenzyme A (HMG-CoA) 
reductase might be involved. To test the hypothesis, the effects of GGTI-2133, a 
direct inhibitor of geran ylgeranyltransferase (GGTase), on antigen-induced 
airway inflammation were investigated in a murine model of allergic bronchial 
asthma. Mice were sensitized and repeatedly challenged with ovalbumin antigen 
(OA). Animals were also treated with GGTI-2133 (5 mg/kg/day, i.p.) once a day 
before and during the antigen inhalation period. Repeated antigen inhalation 
caused an infiltration of inflammatory cells, especially eosinophils, into 
airways. Significant increases in interleukin (IL)-4, IL-13, eotaxin, thymus and 
activation-regulated chemokine (TARC) and leukotriene B4 (LTB4) in 
bronchoalveolar lavage fluids and total and OA-specific IgE in sera were also 
found in the antigen-exposed animals. The systemic treatments with GGTI-2133 
inhibited the antigen-induced eosinophil infiltration into airways almost 
completely. However, interestingly, the GGTI-2133 treatment did not affect the 
levels of these chemotactic factors and IgE. These findings suggest that 
selective inhibition of GGTase is effective for eosinophilic airway inflammation 
such as asthma.

DOI: 10.1177/039463200902200408
PMID: 20074456 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Yonsei Med J. 2009 Dec 31;50(6):744-50. doi: 10.3349/ymj.2009.50.6.744. Epub 
2009 Dec 18.

Update on recent advances in the management of aspirin exacerbated respiratory 
disease.

Palikhe NS(1), Kim JH, Park HS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Allergy and Rheumatology, Ajou University School of Medicine, 
Yeongtong-gu, Suwon, Korea.

Aspirin intolerant asthma (AIA) is frequently characterized as an aspirin 
(ASA)-exacerbated respiratory disease (AERD). It is a clinical syndrome 
associated with chronic severe inflammation in the upper and lower airways 
resulting in chronic rhinitis, sinusitis, recurrent polyposis, and asthma. AERD 
generally develops secondary to abnormalities in inflammatory mediators and 
arachidonic acid biosynthesis expression. Upper and lower airway eosinophil 
infiltration is a key feature of AERD; however, the exact mechanisms of such 
chronic eosinophilic inflammation are not fully understood. Cysteinyl 
leukotriene over-production may be a key factor in the induction of eosinophilic 
activation. Genetic studies have suggested a role for variability of genes in 
disease susceptibility and response to medication. Potential genetic biomarkers 
contributing to the AERD phenotype include HLA-DPB1*301, LTC4S, ALOX5, CYSLT, 
PGE2, TBXA2R, TBX21, MS4A2, IL10 -1082A > G, ACE -262A > T, and CRTH2 -466T > C; 
the four-locus SNP set was composed of B2ADR 46A > G, CCR3 -520T > G, CysLTR1 
-634C > T, and FCER1B -109T > C. Management of AERD is an important issue. 
Aspirin ingestion may result in significant morbidity and mortality, and 
patients must be advised regarding aspirin risk. Leukotriene receptor 
antagonists (LTRA) that inhibit leukotriene pathways have an established role in 
long-term AERD management and rhinosinusitis. Aspirin desensitization may be 
required for the relief of upper and lower airway symptoms in AERD patients. 
Future research should focus on identification of biomarkers for a comprehensive 
diagnostic approach.

DOI: 10.3349/ymj.2009.50.6.744
PMCID: PMC2796398
PMID: 20046412 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no financial conflicts of 
interest.


4. Curr Mol Pharmacol. 2009 Jun;2(2):182-9. doi: 10.2174/1874467210902020182.

New insights on the possible role of mast cells in aspirin-induced asthma.

Mortaz E(1), Engels F, Nijkamp FP, Redegeld FA.

Author information:
(1)Division of Pharmacology and Pathophysiology, Utrecht Institute for 
Pharmaceutical Sciences, Faculty of Science, Utrecht University, Utrecht, The 
Netherlands. e.mortaz@uu.nl

Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) are major drugs used in the 
treatment of inflammation and pain in a wide variety of disorders. The 
best-known mechanism of action of NSAIDs is the inhibition of prostaglandin 
synthesis as a result of their action on cyclooxygenase (COX) enzymes. However, 
data have been accumulating through the years indicating that NSAIDs also act on 
other targets in cell signaling. It has been established that NSAIDs induce 
anti-inflammatory effects independent of COX. Acetylsalicylic acid (ASA) and 
other inhibitors of COX induce severe bronchospasms and asthmatic attacks in a 
significant population of asthmatic patients. The etiology of ASA induced asthma 
is complex and not fully understood, but most evidence points towards an 
abnormality of arachidonic acid (AA) metabolism. Since doses of ASA necessary to 
treat chronic inflammatory diseases appeared much higher than those required to 
inhibit PG synthesis, COX-independent mechanisms of NSAIDs were postulated. 
Recently, we have shown that NSAIDs induced expression of heat shock proteins 
specially HSP70. Heat shock proteins (HSPs) are normal intracellular proteins 
that are produced in greater amounts when cells are subjected to stress or 
injury. Interestingly, a potential pathogenic role for heat shock proteins in 
diseases such as autoimmune disease, vascular disease has been reported. Because 
mast cells have been reported to play a role in the pathogenesis of ASA induced 
asthma, a link between heat shock proteins and this disease could postulated. In 
this review, an overview is given on aspirin-induced asthma and the cells and 
mediators that may play a role therein. Mast cell signaling with regard to 
interaction with NSAIDs and heat shock proteins (HSPs) and toll-like receptors 
(TLRs) is further highlighted.

DOI: 10.2174/1874467210902020182
PMID: 20021457 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Proc Am Thorac Soc. 2009 Dec;6(8):720-3. doi: 10.1513/pats.200907-059DP.

Obstructive lung disease from conception to old age: differences in the 
treatment of adults and children with asthma.

O'Byrne PM(1).

Author information:
(1)Firestone Institute for Respiratory Health, St. Joseph's Hospital and 
Department of Medicine, McMaster University, Hamilton, Ontario, Canada. 
obyrnep@mcmaster.ca

Achieving asthma control is the focus of asthma management. Inhaled 
corticosteroids are the most effective treatment for asthma in children and 
adults, with no evidence that the magnitude of benefit differs between adults 
and school-aged children. Leukotriene inhibitors are more widely used in 
children than in adults. This may be because provoking stimuli, such as 
environmental allergens and frequent exercise, are more important asthma 
triggers in children or because parental concerns about the side effects of 
treatment with ICS. Inhaled corticosteroid/long-acting inhaled beta(2)-agonist 
combinations may not be as effective in children as in they are adults in 
improving asthma control and reducing asthma exacerbations.

DOI: 10.1513/pats.200907-059DP
PMID: 20008883 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Hematology Am Soc Hematol Educ Program. 2009:45-53. doi: 
10.1182/asheducation-2009.1.45.

Asthma and sickle cell disease: two distinct diseases or part of the same 
process?

Field JJ(1), DeBaun MR.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Hematology, Washington University School 
of Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA. jfield@dom.wustl.edu

A physician diagnosis of asthma in children and adults with sickle cell disease 
(SCD) has been associated with increased rates of pain and acute chest syndrome 
(ACS) episodes and premature death. Despite the clinical significance of a 
doctor's diagnosis of asthma in individuals with SCD, the criteria for a 
physician diagnosis of asthma are not well defined. Many features of asthma are 
common in individuals with SCD, including symptoms of wheezing, obstructive lung 
disease and airway hyper-responsiveness. However, it is not clear if these signs 
and symptoms of asthma reflect a physician diagnosis of asthma, or if these 
asthma features are related to SCD. Further complicating the diagnosis of asthma 
in children with SCD is the significant overlap in clinical manifestations 
between an asthma exacerbation and an ACS episode. Evidence supporting the 
concept that asthma and SCD are separate co-morbid conditions includes a similar 
prevalence of asthma between children with SCD and those in the general 
population and the observation that asthma is inherited in a familial pattern in 
the families of children with SCD. In contrast, there is significant evidence 
that asthma-like features may be associated with SCD without a diagnosis of 
asthma, including a higher than expected prevalence of airway 
hyper-responsiveness and obstructive lung disease. Regardless of whether SCD and 
asthma are distinct or overlapping co-morbid conditions, we recommend a 
systematic and complete evaluation of asthma when the diagnosis is suspected or 
when patients have multiple episodes of pain or ACS.

DOI: 10.1182/asheducation-2009.1.45
PMID: 20008181 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Eur J Clin Invest. 2010 Feb;40(2):103-9. doi:
10.1111/j.1365-2362.2009.02221.x.  Epub 2009 Nov 12.

The acute effect of smoking in healthy and asthmatic smokers.

Papaioannou AI(1), Koutsokera A, Tanou K, Kiropoulos TS, Tsilioni I, Oikonomidi 
S, Liadaki K, Pournaras S, Gourgoulianis KI, Kostikas K.

Author information:
(1)University of Thessaly Medical School, Larissa, Greece.

BACKGROUND: Acute exposure to cigarette smoke is related to airway and systemic 
inflammation and oxidative stress. Little is known about the acute effect of 
cigarette smoking in smoking asthmatics. The aim of this study was to evaluate 
the acute effect of smoking in airway and systemic inflammation and oxidative 
stress in normal smokers and patients with properly treated well-controlled 
persistent asthma.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Ten normal smokers and 10 smokers with moderate 
persistent asthma controlled with LABA and ICS were recruited. Subjects 
refrained from smoking for at least 12 h prior to their inclusion. We compared 
the effects of smoking of two cigarettes on airway obstruction, airway 
inflammation and oxidative stress [by measuring fraction of exhaled nitric oxide 
(FeNO), plus pH and 8-isoprostane in exhaled breath condensate (EBC)] before and 
30, 90 and 180 min after smoking. Furthermore, we evaluated systemic oxidative 
stress, C-reactive protein (CRP) and serum amyloid A (SAA) and urine leukotriene 
E(4) (LTE(4)) before and 180 min after smoking.
RESULTS: No differences were observed in EBC pH and 8-isoprostane, FeNO and 
systemic oxidative stress between the groups at baseline. In asthmatics, EBC pH 
decreased 30 min and EBC 8-isoprostane increased 90 min after smoking (P = 0.039 
and P = 0.029 respectively), which was not evident in smoking controls. Serum 
oxidative stress increased only in asthmatic smokers at 180 min (P = 0.001). No 
differences were observed in SAA, CRP and urine LTE(4) levels before and after 
smoking.
CONCLUSION: Acute smoking has more deleterious effects in well-controlled 
properly treated asthmatic smokers compared with matched normal smokers.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2362.2009.02221.x
PMID: 19912318 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Immunobiology. 2010 Jul;215(7):527-34. doi: 10.1016/j.imbio.2009.09.004. Epub 
2009 Nov 7.

Choline attenuates immune inflammation and suppresses oxidative stress in 
patients with asthma.

Mehta AK(1), Singh BP, Arora N, Gaur SN.

Author information:
(1)Allergy and Immunology Section, Institute of Genomics and Integrative 
Biology, Delhi, India.

Asthma is a chronic immune inflammatory disease characterized by variable 
airflow obstruction and increased bronchial hyperreactivity (BHR). Therapeutic 
interventions reduce airway inflammation and relieve symptoms but associated 
with potential side effects that limit their usefulness. The present study was 
undertaken to assess the effect of choline on immune inflammation and BHR in 
asthma subjects. The patients of asthma (n=76) were recruited and treated with 
choline supplement (1500 mg twice) or standard pharmacotherapy for 6 months in 
two groups. The patients were evaluated by clinical, immunologic and biochemical 
parameters. The treatment with choline showed significant reduction in 
symptom/drug score and improvement in PC(20) FEV1 compared to baseline or 
standard pharmacotherapy (p<0.01). Choline therapy significantly reduced IL-4, 
IL-5 and TNF-alpha level as compared to baseline or standard pharmacotherapy 
after 6 months (p<0.01). Blood eosinophil count and total IgE levels were 
reduced in both the treatment groups. Cysteinyl leukotriene and leukotriene B4 
were suppressed significantly by choline treatment (p<0.01). This was 
accompanied by decreased 8-isoprostanes, a biomarker for oxidative stress after 
choline treatment (p<0.01). Choline therapy modulates immune inflammation and 
suppresses oxidative stress in asthma patients. It can be used as an adjunct 
therapy for asthma patients.

Copyright 2009 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.imbio.2009.09.004
PMID: 19897276 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Clin Exp Allergy. 2010 Jan;40(1):85-93. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2222.2009.03386.x.
 Epub 2009 Nov 4.

Prostaglandin E2 and cysteinyl leukotriene concentrations in sputum: association 
with asthma severity and eosinophilic inflammation.

Aggarwal S(1), Moodley YP, Thompson PJ, Misso NL.

Author information:
(1)Centre for Asthma, Allergy and Respiratory Research, Lung Institute of 
Western Australia, The University of Western Australia, Perth, WA, Australia.

BACKGROUND: Inflammation of the airways in asthma is associated with the 
production of cysteinyl leukotrienes (cysLT), prostaglandin (PG)E(2), 
8-isoprostane, nitric oxide and other mediators. However, the relationship 
between asthma severity or eosinophilic inflammation and the concentrations of 
mediators in sputum is unclear.
OBJECTIVE: To assess sputum PGE(2), cysLT, 8-isoprostane and nitrate 
concentrations, as well as urinary leukotriene (LT)E(4) and 
9alpha,11beta-prostaglandin (PG)F(2) concentrations, in patients with differing 
severities of asthma and eosinophilic or non-eosinophilic airway inflammation.
METHODS: Inflammatory cells in sputum were assessed in 12 patients with mild, 14 
with moderate and 12 with severe persistent asthma, as well as in 13 control 
subjects. Asthmatic patients were categorized into those with eosinophilic or 
non-eosinophilic airway inflammation. Sputum PGE(2), cysLT and 8-isoprostane, 
and urinary LTE(4) were extracted on immunoaffinity sorbents, and the 
concentrations of all mediators were measured using enzyme immunoassays. Sputum 
nitrate concentrations were measured on a chemiluminescence analyzer.
RESULTS: Sputum PGE(2) concentrations were higher in both moderate (1710 pg/mL) 
and severe asthmatic (1590 pg/mL) compared with control subjects (827 pg/mL) 
(P<0.05). CysLT concentrations were higher in moderate asthmatic compared with 
control or severe asthmatic subjects (P<0.05). Sputum PGE(2) concentrations were 
lower in patients with eosinophilic (1180 pg/mL) compared with non-eosinophilic 
airway inflammation (2520 pg/mL) (P=0.02). In contrast, sputum cysLT and urinary 
LTE(4) concentrations were higher in those with eosinophilic airway inflammation 
(P<0.05). Forced expiratory volume in 1 s was inversely correlated with sputum 
eosinophils in all asthmatic patients (r(s)=-0.5, P=0.002). There were no 
significant differences in sputum 8-isoprostane or nitrate concentrations.
CONCLUSIONS: Increased airway concentrations of PGE(2) are consistent with the 
hypothesis that PGE(2) has a bronchoprotective and anti-inflammatory role in 
patients with more severe asthma. A reduced PGE(2) to cysLT ratio in the airways 
may adversely affect lung function and contribute to persistence of symptoms and 
airway remodelling in patients with eosinophilic airway inflammation.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2222.2009.03386.x
PMID: 19895589 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


10. J Tradit Chin Med. 2009 Sep;29(3):220-3. doi: 10.1016/s0254-6272(09)60070-4.

Effects of wuwei dilong decoction on inflammatory cells and cytokines in asthma 
model guinea pigs.

Li XH(1), Tu XY, Zhang DX, Xu JF, Wang WY, Zhang Y, Du YM.

Author information:
(1)Medical College of Changliang University, Jingzhou 434000, China.

OBJECTIVE: To explore the effects and the mechanism of Wuwei Dilong Decoction 
(Schisandra Fruit and Earthworm Decoction) for treatment of asthma.
METHODS: The asthma guinea pig model was established with spray of ovalbumin 
(OVA). Fifteen days later, the guinea pigs were administered by intra-gastric 
perfusion of Wuwei Dilong Decoction once a day for 8 consecutive days. Blood 
samples were taken for testing the total leucocytes, eosinophil (EOS), 
lymphocytes, interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma) and leukotriene B4 (LTB4).
RESULTS: In the asthma model group, the total leucocytes, EOS and lymphocytes 
were all increased, with significant differences as compared with the different 
dosage Wuwei Dilong Decoction groups (P < 0.01 or P < 0.05). The serum LTB4 in 
the asthma model group was significantly increased and IFN-gamma decreased. 
After administration of Wuwei Dilong Decoction of the large, medium and small 
dosages, LTB4 decreased, while IFN-gamma increased (P < 0.05 or P < 0.01).
CONCLUSION: Wuwei Dilong Decoction can inhibit infiltration and diffusion of the 
inflammatory cells in the asthma model guinea pigs, and regulate LTB4 and 
IFN-gamma, which is probably one of the important mechanisms of Wuwei Dilong 
Decoction for relieving asthma.

DOI: 10.1016/s0254-6272(09)60070-4
PMID: 19894390 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol. 2009 Oct;103(4):358-9. doi: 
10.1016/S1081-1206(10)60540-6.

Regulation of monocyte chemoattractant protein 1 by cysteinyl leukotriene D4 in 
human lung epithelial A549 cells.

Kim SH, Yang EM, Kim SH, Park HS.

DOI: 10.1016/S1081-1206(10)60540-6
PMID: 19852204 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Allergy. 2010 May;65(5):663-4. doi: 10.1111/j.1398-9995.2009.02206.x. Epub
2009  Oct 12.

Elevated urinary leukotriene E excretion in asthma: a comparison of HPLC-mass 
spectrometry and ELISA.

Sanak M(1), Bochenek G, Faber J, Plutecka H, Szczeklik A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Jagiellonian University School of Medicine, Krakow, 
Poland. mmszczek@cyf-kr.edu.pl

DOI: 10.1111/j.1398-9995.2009.02206.x
PMID: 19839969 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Curr Med Res Opin. 2009 Dec;25(12):2865-75. doi: 10.1185/03007990903316491.

Clinical study of the effects on asthma-related QOL and asthma management of a 
medical food in adult asthma patients.

Lindemann J(1), David Pampe E, Peterkin JJ, Orozco-Cronin P, Belofsky G, Stull 
D.

Author information:
(1)Efficas Inc., Boulder, CO, USA. jlindemann@efficas.com

BACKGROUND: Asthma can have a negative impact on quality of life although this 
is not well correlated with objective evaluations of pulmonary function. A 
medical food, EFF1009, containing the fatty acids gamma-linolenic acid (GLA) and 
eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA) decreases leukotriene B(4) synthesis in patients 
with asthma. Two previous clinical studies with EFF1009 provided preliminary 
evidence that the medical food improves asthma-related quality of life (ARQOL) 
and asthma management.
OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the impact on ARQOL of EFF1009 in adults with asthma.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: The study was a randomized, prospective, 
double-blind, placebo-controlled, parallel group study in twenty-one (N = 21 
evaluable) subjects with mild to moderate persistent asthma who consumed the 
medical food emulsion or placebo emulsion daily for 28 days. All participants 
continued their asthma medications throughout the study. ARQOL, including asthma 
signs and symptoms, and asthma control were measured using the Mini Asthma 
Quality of Life Questionnaire (MiniAQLQ) and the Asthma Control Questionnaire 
(ACQ), administered at baseline, Day 14 and Day 28. Safety and tolerability 
parameters, including adverse events, were monitored.
RESULTS: Baseline ARQOL scores, forced expiratory volume in one second (FEV(1)) 
and other characteristics were balanced between both groups. Mean (standard 
error) total MiniAQLQ scores changed by 0.73 (0.38) and -0.22 (0.36) in the 
EFF1009 and placebo groups, respectively, (p < 0.05). The MiniAQLQ symptom 
domain score was improved in the EFF1009 group (p < 0.05). Total scores for the 
ACQ were not significantly improved in either group. Levels of the fatty acid 
EPA in plasma increased in the EFF1009 group but not the placebo group (p < 
0.03). The medical food was well tolerated and no safety concerns were 
identified.
CONCLUSIONS: The dietary addition of the medical food EFF1009 to asthma 
management regimens can improve patient perceived, ARQOL and can also improve 
asthma management as evidenced by reduced asthma symptoms. An additional study 
of the medical food, with larger subject population and longer treatment 
duration, is warranted to confirm these findings.

DOI: 10.1185/03007990903316491
PMID: 19811112 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Leuk Lymphoma. 2009 Oct;50(10):1721-2. doi: 10.1080/10428190903161059.

Dramatic resolution of respiratory symptoms with imatinib mesylate in patients 
with chronic myeloid leukemia presenting with lower airway symptoms resembling 
asthma.

Ramanujam D, McNicholl F, Furby D, Richardson D, Cuthbert RJ, McMullin MF.

DOI: 10.1080/10428190903161059
PMID: 19757309 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


15. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 2009 Dec;331(3):1042-50. doi: 10.1124/jpet.109.158089. 
Epub 2009 Sep 11.

Pharmacological characterization of 
3-[3-tert-butylsulfanyl-1-[4-(6-methoxy-pyridin-3-yl)-benzyl]-5-(pyridin-2-ylmethoxy)-1H-indol-2-yl]-2,2-dimethyl-propionic 
acid (AM103), a novel selective 5-lipoxygenase-activating protein inhibitor that 
reduces acute and chronic inflammation.

Lorrain DS(1), Bain G, Correa LD, Chapman C, Broadhead AR, Santini AM, 
Prodanovich P, Darlington JV, Hutchinson JH, King C, Lee C, Baccei C, Li Y, 
Arruda JM, Evans JF.

Author information:
(1)Amira Pharmaceuticals, San Diego, California 92121, USA. 
dan.lorrain@amirapharm.com

Leukotrienes (LTs) are proinflammatory lipid mediators synthesized by the 
conversion of arachidonic acid (AA) to LTA(4) by the enzyme 5-lipoxygenase 
(5-LO) in the presence of 5-LO-activating protein (FLAP). 
3-[3-tert-Butylsulfanyl-1-[4-(6-methoxy-pyridin-3-yl)-benzyl]-5-(pyridin-2-ylmethoxy)-1H-indol-2-yl]-2,2-dimethyl-propionic 
acid (AM103) is a novel selective FLAP inhibitor in development for the 
treatment of respiratory conditions such as asthma. In a rat ex vivo whole-blood 
calcium ionophore-induced LTB(4) assay, AM103 (administered orally at 1 mg/kg) 
displayed >50% inhibition for up to 6 h with a calculated EC(50) of 
approximately 60 nM. When rat lung was challenged in vivo with calcium 
ionophore, AM103 inhibited LTB(4) and cysteinyl leukotriene (CysLT) production 
with ED(50) values of 0.8 and 1 mg/kg, respectively. In this model, the EC(50) 
derived from plasma AM103 was approximately 330 nM for inhibition of both LTB(4) 
and CysLT. In an acute inflammation setting, AM103 displayed dose-dependent 
inhibition of LTB(4), CysLT, and plasma protein extravasation induced by 
peritoneal zymosan injection. In a model of chronic lung inflammation using 
ovalbumin-primed and challenged BALB/c mice, AM103 reduced the concentrations of 
eosinophil peroxidase, CysLTs, and interleukin-5 in the bronchoalveolar lavage 
fluid. Finally, AM103 increased survival time in mice exposed to a lethal 
intravenous injection of platelet-activating factor. In summary, AM103 is a 
novel, potent and selective FLAP inhibitor that has excellent pharmacodynamic 
properties in vivo and is effective in animal models of acute and chronic 
inflammation and in a model of lethal shock.

DOI: 10.1124/jpet.109.158089
PMID: 19749079 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


16. J Med Chem. 2009 Oct 8;52(19):5803-15. doi: 10.1021/jm900945d.

5-lipoxygenase-activating protein inhibitors: development of 
3-[3-tert-butylsulfanyl-1-[4-(6-methoxy-pyridin-3-yl)-benzyl]-5-(pyridin-2-ylmethoxy)-1H-indol-2-yl]-2,2-dimethyl-propionic 
acid (AM103).

Hutchinson JH(1), Li Y, Arruda JM, Baccei C, Bain G, Chapman C, Correa L, 
Darlington J, King CD, Lee C, Lorrain D, Prodanovich P, Rong H, Santini A, Stock 
N, Prasit P, Evans JF.

Author information:
(1)Departments of Chemistry, Amira Pharmaceuticals, San Diego, California 92121, 
USA. john.hutchinson@amirapharm.com

The potent and selective 5-lipoxygenase-activating protein leukotriene synthesis 
inhibitor 
3-[3-tert-butylsulfanyl-1-[4-(6-methoxy-pyridin-3-yl)-benzyl]-5-(pyridin-2-ylmethoxy)-1H-indol-2-yl]-2,2-dimethyl-propionic 
acid (11j) is described. Lead optimization was designed to afford compounds with 
superior in vitro and in vivo inhibition of leukotriene synthesis in addition to 
having excellent pharmacokinetics and safety in rats and dogs. The key 
structural features of these new compounds are incorporation of heterocycles on 
the indole N-benzyl substituent and replacement of the quinoline group resulting 
in compounds with excellent in vitro and in vivo activities, superior 
pharmacokinetics, and improved physical properties. The methoxypyridine 
derivative 11j has an IC(50) of 4.2 nM in a 5-lipoxygenase-activating protein 
(FLAP) binding assay, an IC(50) of 349 nM in the human blood LTB(4) inhibition 
assay, and is efficacious in a murine ovalbumin model of allergen-induced 
asthma. Compound 11j was selected for clinical development and has successfully 
completed phase 1 trials in healthy volunteers.

DOI: 10.1021/jm900945d
PMID: 19739647 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Int Immunopharmacol. 2009 Oct;9(11):1337-41. doi:
10.1016/j.intimp.2009.08.007.  Epub 2009 Aug 23.

Inhaled montelukast inhibits cysteinyl-leukotriene-induced bronchoconstriction 
in ovalbumin-sensitized guinea-pigs: the potential as a new asthma medication.

Muraki M(1), Imbe S, Sato R, Ikeda Y, Yamagata S, Iwanaga T, Tohda Y.

Author information:
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine and Allergology, Kinki University School 
of Medicine, Japan. muraki@ko-arena.med.kindai.ac.jp

Oral cysteinyl-leukotriene (LT) receptor antagonists such as montelukast are 
used for reducing airway inflammation and exacerbations. However, inhaled 
therapy using LT receptor antagonists has not been studied. In the present 
study, the effect of inhaled montelukast was investigated on airway 
hyperresponsiveness measured by cysteinyl-LT induced bronchoconstriction in an 
animal model of asthma. Bronchoconstriction responses were induced by inhaled 
LTC4 and LTD4 (0.2 microg/ml each) or three doses of intravenous LTC4 and LTD4 
(0.3, 1, 3 microg/kg) in ovalbumin (OVA)-sensitized Hartley male guinea-pigs. 
The response was measured by the change in peak pressure of airway opening 
(Pao). The effect of montelukast was evaluated by the comparison of 
bronchoconstriction responses between the groups of animals pre-treated with 
15-min inhalation of 10mg/ml montelukast and saline. To evaluate the tissue 
injury which might be caused by montelukast inhalation, lung tissues were 
examined for the histology. The broncoconstriction responses induced by inhaled 
LTC4 and LTD4 were enhanced by OVA sensitization in the guinea-pigs. In 
sensitized animals, the significant increases in peak Pao were 18.5+/-2.1 
cmH(2)O by LTC4 inhalation and 25.0+/-1.6 cmH(2)O by LTD4 inhalation on average. 
Prior treatment of inhaled montelukast potently suppressed the peak Pao 
increases induced by both inhaled and intravenous LTC4 and LTD4 (all P<0.01 vs. 
saline control). Moreover, the suppression of inhaled montelukast against 
LTD4-induced bronchoconstriction was observed for at least up to 24h. According 
to the histological examination, montelukast inhalation produced no injury to 
the lung tissue. Inhaled montelukast, a cysteinyl-LT receptor antagonist, was 
effective in inhibiting cysteinyl-LT-induced acute bronchoconstriction, and may 
have the potential for clinical use as a new asthma drug.

DOI: 10.1016/j.intimp.2009.08.007
PMID: 19706339 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


18. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2009 Sep;124(3):422-7. doi:
10.1016/j.jaci.2009.06.035.  Epub 2009 Aug 8.

Genetics and pharmacogenetics of the leukotriene pathway.

Tantisira KG(1), Drazen JM.

Author information:
(1)Channing Laboratory, Brigham and Women's Hospital and Harvard Medical School, 
Boston, Mass 02115, USA. rekgt@channing.harvard.edu

Leukotrienes are now established contributors to the inflammatory process in 
asthma, and leukotriene modifiers are mainstays in the therapy of asthma. This 
review focuses on published association studies implicating the role of 
leukotriene pathway genes in asthma pathogenesis and treatment response, 
specifically focusing on those genetic variants associated with asthma affection 
status, the development of aspirin-exacerbated respiratory disease, and 
pharmacogenetic response. Although published studies have been limited by small 
sample sizes and a lack of independent replication, multiple loci within 
multiple leukotriene pathway genes have now been associated in more than 1 study 
related to asthma or asthma treatment response. Those specific variants include 
2 variants in the 5-lipoxygenase gene (ALOX5) that are both associated with 
response to 5-lipoxygenase inhibition and to leukotriene receptor antagonists, 
variants in genes encoding the 2 established cysteinyl leukotriene receptor 
antagonists (CYSLTR1 and CYSLTR2) that are both associated with asthma 
susceptibility in at least 2 independent populations, and a leukotriene C(4) 
synthase promoter polymorphism (LTC4s) that has been associated with asthma 
affection status and asthma-exacerbated respiratory disease. Despite these 
successes, genetic investigations into this pathway remain in their formative 
stages. Future studies aimed at providing a broader scope of investigation 
through increased sample sizes and through genome-wide approaches are needed.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jaci.2009.06.035
PMCID: PMC2794036
PMID: 19665766 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Mayo Clin Proc. 2009 Aug;84(8):675-84. doi: 10.4065/84.8.675.

Impact of asthma controller medications on clinical, economic, and 
patient-reported outcomes.

Tan H(1), Sarawate C, Singer J, Elward K, Cohen RI, Smart BA, Busk MF, Lustig J, 
O'Brien JD, Schatz M.

Author information:
(1)Health Outcomes Research, HealthCore, Wilmington, DE 19801, USA. 
jtan@healthcore.com

Comment in
    Mayo Clin Proc. 2009 Aug;84(8):673-4. doi: 10.4065/84.8.673.

OBJECTIVE: To comprehensively evaluate clinical, economic, and patient-reported 
outcomes associated with various therapeutic classes of asthma controller 
medications.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: This observational study, which used administrative claims 
data from US commercial health plans, included patients with asthma aged 18 
through 64 years who filled a prescription for at least 1 asthma controller 
medication from September 1, 2003, through August 31, 2005. Outcome metrics 
included the use of short-acting beta-agonists (SABAs), the use of oral 
corticosteroids, inpatient (INP)/emergency department (ED) visits, and 
asthma-related health care costs. A subset of 5000 patients was randomly 
selected for a survey using the Mini-Asthma Quality of Life Questionnaire, the 
Work Productivity and Activity Impairment questionnaire, and the Asthma Therapy 
Assessment Questionnaire.
RESULTS: Of 56,168 eligible patients, 823 returned completed questionnaires. 
Compared with inhaled corticosteroids (ICSs), leukotriene modifiers (LMs) were 
associated with lower odds of INP/ED visits (odds ratio [OR], 0.80; P<.001), 
lower odds of using 6 or more SABA canisters (OR, 0.81; P<.001), and higher 
annual cost ($193; P<.001). In the subgroup analysis of adherent patients, LMs 
were associated with higher odds of INP/ED visits (OR, 1.74; P=.04), lower odds 
of using 6 or more SABA canisters (OR, 0.46; P<.001), and higher annual cost 
($235; P<.001). Inhaled corticosteroids and LMs had a comparable impact on all 
patient-reported outcomes. For combination therapy, ICS plus a long-acting 
beta-agonist consistently showed at least equivalent or better outcomes in the 
use of SABAs and oral corticosteroids, the risk of INP/ED visits, cost, asthma 
control level, quality of life, and impairment in productivity and activity.
CONCLUSION: Inhaled corticosteroids were associated with a lower risk of INP/ED 
visits, and a lower cost if adherence was achieved. When adherence cannot be 
achieved, LMs may be a reasonable alternative. Combination therapy with ICS plus 
a long-acting beta-agonist was associated with better or equivalent clinical, 
economic, and patient-reported outcomes.

DOI: 10.4065/84.8.675
PMCID: PMC2719520
PMID: 19648384 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


20. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2009 Sep;124(3):406-14; quiz 415-6. doi: 
10.1016/j.jaci.2009.05.046. Epub 2009 Aug 3.

The leukotriene E4 puzzle: finding the missing pieces and revealing the 
pathobiologic implications.

Austen KF(1), Maekawa A, Kanaoka Y, Boyce JA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Harvard Medical School, Division of Rheumatology, 
Immunology and Allergy, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, Mass 02115, USA. 
fausten@rics.bwh.harvard.edu

Comment in
    J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2010 Apr;125(4):950-1; author reply 951. doi: 
10.1016/j.jaci.2009.12.940.

The intracellular parent of the cysteinyl leukotrienes (cysLTs), leukotriene 
(LT) C(4), is formed by conjugation of LTA(4) and reduced glutathione by LTC(4) 
synthase in mast cells, eosinophils, basophils, and macrophages. After 
extracellular export, LTC(4) is converted to LTD(4) and LTE(4) through 
sequential enzymatic removal of glutamic acid and then glycine. Only LTE(4) is 
sufficiently stable to be prominent in biologic fluids, such as urine or 
bronchoalveolar lavage fluid, of asthmatic individuals and at sites of 
inflammation in animal models. LTE(4) has received little attention because it 
binds poorly to the classical type 1 and 2 cysLT receptors and is much less 
active on normal airways than LTC(4) or LTD(4). However, early studies indicated 
that LTE(4) caused skin swelling in human subjects as potently as LTC(4) and 
LTD(4), that airways of asthmatic subjects (particularly those that were aspirin 
sensitive) were selectively hyperresponsive to LTE(4), and that a potential 
distinct LTE(4) receptor was present in guinea pig trachea. Recent studies have 
begun to uncover receptors selective for LTE(4): P2Y(12), an adenosine 
diphosphate receptor, and CysLT(E)R, which was observed functionally in the skin 
of mice lacking the type 1 and 2 cysLT receptors. These findings prompt a 
renewed focus on LTE(4) receptors as therapeutic targets that are not currently 
addressed by available receptor antagonists.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jaci.2009.05.046
PMCID: PMC2739263
PMID: 19647860 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Eur J Pharmacol. 2009 Sep 15;618(1-3):63-9. doi:
10.1016/j.ejphar.2009.07.005.  Epub 2009 Jul 17.

NT-702 (parogrelil hydrochloride, NM-702), a novel and potent phosphodiesterase 
3 inhibitor, suppress the asthmatic response in guinea pigs, with both 
bronchodilating and anti-inflammatory effects.

Hori M(1), Iwama T, Asakura Y, Kawanishi M, Kamon J, Hoshino A, Takahashi S, 
Takahashi K, Nakaike S, Tsuruzoe N.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Molecular Function and Pharmacology Laboratories, 
Taisho Pharmaceutical Co Ltd, Saitama, Japan. miyuki.hori@po.rd.taisho.co.jp

We evaluated the effects of NT-702 (parogrelil hydrochloride, NM-702, 
4-bromo-6-[3-(4-chlorophenyl) propoxy]-5-[(pyridine-3-ylmethyl) amino] 
pyridazin-3(2H)-one hydrochloride), a selective phosphodiesterase 3 inhibitor, 
on the asthmatic response in guinea pigs. NT-702 at a concentration of 1 x 
10(-7)M elevated the cyclic adenosine monophosphate content in prostaglandin 
E(2)-treated guinea pig tracheal smooth muscle cells. Leukotriene (LT) D(4)- and 
histamine-induced contraction of isolated guinea pig tracheal strips was 
inhibited by NT-702, with EC(50) values of 3.2 x 10(-7) and 2.5 x 10(-7)M, 
respectively. In an in vivo study, NT-702 suppressed LTD(4)-induced 
bronchoconstriction and the ovalbumin-induced immediate asthmatic response in 
guinea pigs through its bronchodilating effect. Furthermore, NT-702 also 
suppressed the ovalbumin-induced late asthmatic response, airway 
hyperresponsiveness, and the accumulation of inflammatory cells in the 
bronchoalveolar lavage fluid. These results suggest that NT-702 has an 
anti-inflammatory effect as well as a bronchodilating effect and might be useful 
as a novel potent therapeutic agent for the treatment of bronchial asthma, a new 
type of agent with both a bronchodilating and an anti-inflammatory effect.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejphar.2009.07.005
PMID: 19616537 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


22. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2009 Sep;124(3):397-403. doi: 
10.1016/j.jaci.2009.05.029. Epub 2009 Jul 16.

Efficacy of leukotriene receptor antagonists and synthesis inhibitors in asthma.

O'Byrne PM(1), Gauvreau GM, Murphy DM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, McMaster University, Firestone Institute for 
Respiratory Health, St Joseph's Healthcare, Hamilton, Ontario, Canada. 
obyrnep@mcmaster.ca

Cysteinyl leukotrienes are important mediators of asthmatic responses. They are 
the most potent bronchoconstrictors known; their release is triggered by 
exposure to inhaled allergens after exercise and after aspirin ingestion by 
subjects with aspirin-sensitive asthma. The cysteinyl leukotrienes promote 
inflammatory cell migration into the airways, as well as bone marrow 
eosinophilopoiesis after allergen inhalation. Leukotriene inhibitors are 
effective at attenuating asthmatic responses to all of these stimuli and are 
also effective at treating persistent asthma. These drugs are a viable 
alternative to low-dose inhaled corticosteroid (ICS) treatment but should be 
reserved for patients who cannot or will not use ICSs, often because of concerns 
about potential side effects of ICS treatment, which limits their use, 
particularly in children. Leukotriene receptor antagonists are also alternatives 
to long-acting inhaled beta(2)-agonists as add-on therapy to ICSs, but their 
efficacy together with ICSs is less than that of ICS/long-acting inhaled 
beta(2)-agonist combinations. Leukotriene receptor antagonists have an excellent 
safety profile.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jaci.2009.05.029
PMID: 19608262 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Zhonghua Nei Ke Za Zhi. 2009 Apr;48(4):299-303.

[The clinical significance of noninvasive inflammatory markers in exhaled breath 
condensate and induced sputum in persistent asthmatic patients].

[Article in Chinese]

Tan CW(1), Liu CT, Wu YH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, West China Hospital, Sichuan University, 
Chengdu, Sichuan 610041, China.

OBJECTIVE: To assess the clinical significance of three different noninvasive 
airway inflammatory indices in induced sputum and exhaled breath condensate 
(EBC) from persistent asthmatic patients.
METHODS: Moderate and severe asthmatic patients were prescribed inhaled 
corticosteroids combined with long-acting beta(2) agonists for a month. The 
symptom scores and percentage of predicted value of forced expiratory volume in 
one second (FEV(1)) (FEV(1)%pred) were measured while the concentrations of 
H(2)O(2), NO(3)(-)/NO(2)(-), and cysteinyl-leukotriene E(4) (LTE(4)) in induced 
sputum and EBC were detected before and after therapy.
RESULTS: A total of twenty-five subjects with moderate and severe asthma were 
enrolled. By combined therapy for one month the asthma symptoms relieved and 
FEV(1)%pred improved significantly (P < 0.01). The concentrations of H(2)O(2), 
NO(3)(-)/NO(2)(-) and LTE(4) in induced sputum and EBC declined significantly (P 
< 0.01) although the concentrations were still higher than those at normal 
baseline. More marked reduction of H(2)O(2) and NO(3)(-)/NO(2)(-) compared to 
LTE(4) was observed. It was revealed that the concentrations of H(2)O(2)and 
NO(3)(-)/NO(2)(-) but not of LTE(4) in EBC were negatively correlated with 
FEV(1)%pred (P < 0.01) and positively with symptom scores. Such correlations 
were also found in H(2)O(2) in induced sputum with FEV(1)%pred and symptom 
scores as well as NO(3)(-)/NO(2)(-) in induced sputum with FEV(1)%pred. The 
improvement of FEV(1)%pred after treatment was positively correlated with the 
reduction of H(2)O(2) and NO(3)(-)/NO(2)(-) both in induced sputum and EBC. 
Correlation analysis also demonstrated three inflammatory indices were 
equivalent in induced sputum and EBC (correlation coefficient of H(2)O(2), 
NO(3)(-)/NO(2)(-) and LTE(4), 0.759, 0.826 and 0.653, respectively. P < 0.01).
CONCLUSIONS: (1) Combined therapy with inhaled corticosteroid plus long-acting 
beta(2) agonist significantly improves the clinical symptoms and lung function 
of patients with moderate and severe asthma companies with marked suppression of 
airway inflammation. (2) Both of EBC and induced sputum sampling are valuable 
noninvasive procedures for detecting asthma airway inflammation, however, EBC 
technique is superior in safety and reproducibility. (3) H(2)O(2) and 
NO(3)(-)/NO(2)(-) seem to be more sensitive indices in diagnosis and monitoring 
asthma compared to LTE(4).

PMID: 19576119 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Zhonghua Jie He He Hu Xi Za Zhi. 2009 Mar;32(3):177-81.

[Effects of leukotriene receptor antagonists on vascular endothelial growth 
factor and its receptors in a sensitized rat model].

[Article in Chinese]

Yang HS(1), Wang L, Yang W, Guan JT, Ma JY, Su Y.

Author information:
(1)Department of Respirology, the Second Affiliated Hospital of Hebei Medical 
University, Shijiazhuang 050000, China. yhs4546@sohu.com.cn

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the effect of montelukast (MK) on airway inflammation 
and remodeling in asthmatic rats, and to explore the regulating role of MK on 
vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) and its receptors.
METHODS: Twenty-four male Sprague-Dawley rats were randomly divided into 3 
groups, a control group (n = 8), an asthmatic group (n = 8) and a MK treated 
group (n = 8). The rats were sensitized with ovalbumin and AL (OH3), and 
repeatedly exposed to aerosolized ovalbumin. Airway reactivity of the animals 
were measured by animal lung function meter. VEGF levels and leukotriene D(4) 
(LTD(4)) in serum were measured by enzyme linked-immunosorbent assay (ELISA). 
The pathologic changes of bronchi and the lung tissue were evaluated, and the 
expression of VEGF and its acceptors was analyzed with immunohistochemistry. The 
vascular counts and vascular smooth muscle thickness were measured by using 
image analysis system.
RESULTS: The bronchial provocation test showed that, in the asthmatic group, the 
average expiratory resistance increased remarkably. The serum levels of VEGF and 
LTD(4) in the asthmatic group were 31 +/- 6 and 11 +/- 4 respectively, 
significantly higher than those in the control group (17 +/- 5 and 6.1 +/- 0.7) 
respectively and in the MK group (15 +/- 4 and 9.8 +/- 1.6) respectively. (F 
63.78, 39.56 all P < 0.01). Immunohistochemistry showed that, the expression of 
VEGF, VEGFR(1) and VEGFR(2) in the asthmatic group were increased, as compared 
to those in the control group and the treated group. The vascular counts were 14 
+/- 2, 22 +/- 2 and 16 +/- 4 in the control, the asthmatic, and the treated 
groups.
CONCLUSIONS: VEGF and its receptors were over-expressed in the sensitized rat 
model, and involved in angiogenesis and airway remodeling. MK may be effective 
in reducing allergic airway inflammation and airway remodeling through VEGF and 
VEGFR.

PMID: 19575935 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Wien Klin Wochenschr. 2009;121(9-10):289-92. doi: 10.1007/s00508-009-1189-4.

COPD is not COPD is not allergy.

Suskovic S.

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is still a poorly understood 
disease. Its pathogenesis is excitingly complex and has systemic consequences 
caused not only by increased production of certain cytokines but also by 
neurohumoral activation, chronic bacterial infection, muscle wasting and 
cachexia. Asthma and COPD have many overlapping clinical features so it should 
not be surprising that in the pathogenesis of COPD mediators such as 
leukotrienes, complement activation, atopic or even autoimmune processes are 
possibly involved. The pathogenesis of cardiovascular system involvement in COPD 
is also multifaceted and includes chronic heart hypoxia, damage by smoking and 
pulmonary hypertension; it must also be viewed as a consequence of systemic 
inflammation and neurohormonal activation. COPD is among the leading causes of 
morbidity and mortality worldwide and therefore it should be studied intensively 
beyond the lung itself. Treatments directed at neurohumoral activation in COPD 
have not been fully addressed; this aspect of COPD should be better understood, 
as it may direct novel therapeutic approaches.

DOI: 10.1007/s00508-009-1189-4
PMID: 19562288 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Zhongguo Dang Dai Er Ke Za Zhi. 2009 Jun;11(6):441-4.

[Relationship between the efficacy of inhaled corticosteroids and the 
leukotriene expression in children with asthma].

[Article in Chinese]

Wu JL(1), Chen AH, Peng QY, Chen RC, Zhong NS.

Author information:
(1)Guangzhou Institute of Respiratory Disease, First Hospital Affiliated to 
Guangzhou Medical College, Guangzhou 510120, China.

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the relationship between leukotriene expression in blood 
polymorphonuclear leukocytes (PMNL) and the efficacy of inhaled corticosteroids 
(ICS) in children with asthma.
METHODS: Thirty-two children with asthma (5-12 years) and ten healthy children 
(control group) were enrolled. The asthmatic children were subdivided into ICS 
well-controlled and ICS poorly-controlled groups based on their clinical 
symptoms and lung function. The level of leukotriene C4 synthase (LTC4S) mRNA in 
PMNL was detected by fluorescence quantitative polymerase chain reaction. The 
level of LTC4S mRNA was expressed by the value of qCt, and the value of qCt was 
diversely correlated with the level of LTC4S mRNA expression. The concentration 
of urinary leukotriene E4 (LTE4) was measured using ELISA.
RESULTS: The expression of LTC4S mRNA in PMNL was significantly higher in 
children with asthma (qCt: 1.12+/-0.27) than that in the control group (qCt: 
1.42+/-0.12; P< 0.05). The expression of LTC4S mRNA in PMNL in the ICS 
poorly-controlled group (qCt: 1.03+/-0.17) was significantly higher than that in 
the ICS well-controlled group (qCt: 1.24+/-0.33; P< 0.05) and the control 
group(1.42+/-0.12; P< 0.01). There was no significant difference in the level of 
urinary LTE4 among the the ICS poorly-controlled, the ICS well-controlled and 
the control groups.
CONCLUSIONS: LTC4S mRNA expression in PMNL in asthmatic children increases, and 
the LTC4S mRNA expression in the ICS poorly-controlled group is higher than that 
in the ICS well-controlled group. This suggests that an increased leukotriene 
expression might be associated with poorly-controlled asthma.

PMID: 19558806 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


27. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2009 Sep;124(3):558-65, 565.e1-3. doi: 
10.1016/j.jaci.2009.04.035. Epub 2009 Jul 9.

Lung mast cells are a source of secreted phospholipases A2.

Triggiani M(1), Giannattasio G, Calabrese C, Loffredo S, Granata F, Fiorello A, 
Santini M, Gelb MH, Marone G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Immunology and Allergy and the Center for Basic and 
Clinical Immunology Research (CISI), University of Naples Federico II, Naples, 
Italy. triggian@unina.it

BACKGROUND: Secreted phospholipases A(2) (sPLA(2)s) are released in plasma and 
other biologic fluids of patients with inflammatory, autoimmune, and allergic 
diseases.
OBJECTIVE: We sought to evaluate sPLA(2) activity in the bronchoalveolar lavage 
fluid (BALF) of asthmatic patients and to examine the expression and release of 
sPLA(2)s from primary human lung mast cells (HLMCs).
METHODS: sPLA(2) activity was measured in BALF and supernatants of either 
unstimulated or anti-IgE-activated HLMCs as hydrolysis of oleic acid from 
radiolabeled Escherichia coli membranes. Expression of sPLA(2)s was examined by 
using RT-PCR. The release of cysteinyl leukotriene (LT) C(4) was measured by 
means of enzyme immunoassay.
RESULTS: Phospholipase A(2) (PLA(2)) activity was higher in the BALF of 
asthmatic patients than in the control group. BALF PLA(2) activity was blocked 
by the sPLA(2) inhibitors dithiothreitol and Me-Indoxam but not by the cytosolic 
PLA(2) inhibitor AZ-1. HLMCs spontaneously released a PLA(2) activity that was 
increased on stimulation with anti-IgE. This PLA(2) activity was blocked by 
dithiothreitol and Me-Indoxam but not by AZ-1. HLMCs constitutively express mRNA 
for group IB, IIA, IID, IIE, IIF, III, V, X, XIIA, and XIIB sPLA(2)s. Anti-IgE 
did not modify the expression of sPLA(2)s. The cell-impermeable inhibitor 
Me-Indoxam significantly reduced (up to 40%) the production of LTC(4) from 
anti-IgE-stimulated HLMCs.
CONCLUSIONS: sPLA(2) activity is increased in the airways of asthmatic patients. 
HLMCs express multiple sPLA(2)s and release 1 or more of them when activated by 
anti-IgE. The sPLA(2)s released by mast cells contribute to LTC(4) production by 
acting in an autocrine fashion. Mast cells can be a source of sPLA(2)s in the 
airways of asthmatic patients.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jaci.2009.04.035
PMCID: PMC2788562
PMID: 19541351 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure of potential conflict of interest: 
The authors have declared that they have no conflict of interest.


28. Prostaglandins Leukot Essent Fatty Acids. 2009 Jul;81(1):9-15. doi: 
10.1016/j.plefa.2009.05.022. Epub 2009 Jun 12.

Leukotriene pathway polymorphisms are associated with altered cysteinyl 
leukotriene production in children with acute asthma.

Bizzintino JA(1), Khoo SK, Zhang G, Martin AC, Rueter K, Geelhoed GC, Goldblatt 
J, Laing IA, Le Souëf PN, Hayden CM.

Author information:
(1)School of Paediatrics and Child Health, University of Western Australia, GPO 
Box D184, Perth, WA 6840, Australia.

Cysteinyl leukotrienes (cysLTs) are pro-inflammatory mediators with increasing 
evidence for a role in childhood acute asthma. This study examined the influence 
of polymorphisms in cysLT pathway genes on urinary leukotriene E(4) (uLTE(4)) 
levels and clinical status in acute asthmatic children. Children aged 2-16 years 
were recruited during an asthma attack (n=205). Where possible, asthma severity 
scores were assigned, ALOX5AP G-336A, ALOX5 G-1708A, LTC4S A-444C and G-1072A, 
GPX4 C718T, and CYSTLTR1 T927C genotypes were determined and uLTE(4) was 
measured in acute and convalescent samples. uLTE(4) levels were higher acutely 
compared with convalescence (acute GM: 115.7pg/mg creatinine; 95% CI 88.6-151.1, 
convalescence GM: 66.4pg/mg creatinine; 95% CI 51.5-85.6; n=50 paired samples, 
p=0.003) and paired sample analysis showed genotype-specific effects with 
significantly increased uLTE(4) for LTC(4)S-444AA (acute GM: 127.9pg/mg 
creatinine; 95% CI 91.8-178.3, convalescence GM: 68.2pg/mg creatinine; 95% CI 
50.5-92.0; n=32, p=0.002), LTC(4)S-1072 GG (acute GM: 126.7pg/mg creatinine; 95% 
CI 95.4-168.3, convalescence GM: 78.9pg/mg creatinine; 95% CI 59.7-104.1; n=39, 
p=0.019) and CYSLTR1 927 TT/T_ (acute GM: 96.8pg/mg creatinine; 95% CI 
73.8-126.9, convalescence GM: 62.4pg/mg creatinine; 95% CI 46.8-83.3; n=28, 
p=0.036) but not AC/CC, GA/AA, or TC/CC/C_, respectively. When we compared the 
allele frequencies of the CYSLTR1 SNP between asthmatics and non-asthmatics, the 
927C allele was found to be a risk allele for asthma (OR=2.13, 95% CI: 
1.06-4.26, p=0.033). Genotypes were not associated with acute or convalescent 
uLTE(4) levels alone and neither the SNPs nor uLTE(4) correlated with acute 
asthma severity. Leukotriene pathway gene polymorphisms may influence the 
magnitude of cysLT production during an attack, yet their influence alone may 
not be substantial enough to alter the severity of exacerbations.

DOI: 10.1016/j.plefa.2009.05.022
PMID: 19524426 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Int Arch Allergy Immunol. 2009;149 Suppl 1:31-8. doi: 10.1159/000210651. Epub
 2009 Jun 3.

Eosinophil superoxide anion generation induced by adhesion molecules and 
leukotriene D4.

Mori M(1), Takaku Y, Kobayashi T, Hagiwara K, Kanazawa M, Nagata M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Saitama Medical University, Saitama 
350-0495, Japan.

RATIONALE: Eosinophils preferentially accumulate at sites of inflammation in the 
asthmatic airway. Participation of circulating eosinophils in the airway 
inflammation in asthma involves their interaction with adhesion molecules 
expressed on the endothelial cell surface and exposure to inflammatory 
mediators, such as cysteinyl leukotrienes (cysLTs).
OBJECTIVE: To investigate whether interaction of eosinophils with adhesion 
molecules modifies the functions of these cells induced by cysLTs.
METHODS: Eosinophils were isolated from the blood of healthy donors, incubated 
in the EIA plates coated with adhesion proteins, and then exposed to LTD4. The 
generation of superoxide anion (O2-), adhesion to the plates, and release of 
eosinophil-derived neutrotoxin (EDN) were evaluated.
RESULTS: Neither VCAM-1 nor LTD4 (100 nM) independently induced eosinophil O2- 
generation, however, combined exposure to the two molecules synergistically 
induced eosinophil O2- generation. ICAM-1 by itself induced eosinophil O2- 
generation, which was enhanced by LTD4. On the contrary, P-selectin did not 
induce O2- generation, either in the presence or absence of LTD4. LTD4 
significantly enhanced eosinophil adhesion to rh-VCAM-1 and rh-ICAM-1, but not 
to rh-P-selectin. Finally, we observed that combined exposure of eosinophils to 
LTD4 and VCAM-1 induced the release of EDN.
CONCLUSION: Combined exposure to VCAM-1 or ICAM-1 and cysLT effectively induces 
the effector functions of eosinophils. Eosinophil adhesion to and migration 
across endothelial cells via these specific adhesion proteins and subsequent 
exposure to cysLTs may be mechanisms underlying activation of the effector 
functions of eosinophils in the asthmatic airway.

Copyright 2009 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000210651
PMID: 19494502 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Chest. 2009 Nov;136(5):1308-1315. doi: 10.1378/chest.09-0103. Epub 2009 Jun
8.

Changes in sputum eicosanoids and inflammatory markers after inhalation 
challenges with occupational agents.

Fernández-Nieto M(1), Sastre B(2), Sastre J(3), Lahoz C(4), Quirce S(5), Madero 
M(1), Del Pozo V(4).

Author information:
(1)Allergy Department, Fundación Jiménez Díaz Capio and Centro de Investigacíon 
Biomedica en Red de Enfermedades Respiratorias (CIBERES), Madrid, Spain.
(2)Immunology Department, Fundación Jiménez Díaz Capio and Centro de 
Investigacíon Biomedica en Red de Enfermedades Respiratorias (CIBERES), Madrid, 
Spain; Allergy Department, Fundación Jiménez Díaz Capio and Centro de 
Investigacíon Biomedica en Red de Enfermedades Respiratorias (CIBERES), Madrid, 
Spain.
(3)Allergy Department, Fundación Jiménez Díaz Capio and Centro de Investigacíon 
Biomedica en Red de Enfermedades Respiratorias (CIBERES), Madrid, Spain. 
Electronic address: jsastre@fjd.es.
(4)Immunology Department, Fundación Jiménez Díaz Capio and Centro de 
Investigacíon Biomedica en Red de Enfermedades Respiratorias (CIBERES), Madrid, 
Spain.
(5)Allergy Department, Hospital Universitario La Paz and CIBERES, Madrid, Spain.

BACKGROUND: An increase in cysteinyl-leukotrienes (LTs) after specific 
inhalation challenge (SIC) with common allergens in patients with atopic asthma 
has been shown previously, but there are scarce data with occupational agents. 
We sought to determine whether there are differences in lower airway 
inflammatory markers and the production of cytokines and eicosanoids between 
patients with a positive or negative SIC response to occupational agents.
METHODS: Twenty-six patients with suspected occupational asthma and 13 healthy 
control subjects were studied. Spirometry, methacholine challenge, and sputum 
induction were performed at baseline and 24 h after SIC with occupational 
agents. Several cytokines and inflammatory mediators, including eicosanoids, 
were measured in sputum.
RESULTS: Twenty-six SICs were carried out with high-molecular-weight or 
low-molecular-weight agents, and the responses were positive in 18 patients. SIC 
elicited nine early asthmatic responses, two dual asthmatic responses, and seven 
isolated late asthmatic responses. Significant increments in sputum eosinophil 
counts were found only in patients with positive SIC responses compared with 
baseline values. Interleukin-10 levels were decreased in patients with positive 
and negative SIC responses compared to those in healthy control subjects. A 
significant increase (p < 0.05) in the LTC(4)/prostaglandin E(2) (PGE(2)) ratio 
was observed in patients after positive SIC responses compared to those with 
negative SIC responses.
CONCLUSIONS: Overexpression of LTC(4), relative underproduction of PGE(2), and 
greater airway eosinophilia were observed in patients with positive SIC 
responses.

DOI: 10.1378/chest.09-0103
PMID: 19505984 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


31. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2009 Jun;123(6):1328-34.e1. doi: 
10.1016/j.jaci.2009.04.005.

Body mass index and phenotype in subjects with mild-to-moderate persistent 
asthma.

Sutherland ER(1), Lehman EB, Teodorescu M, Wechsler ME; National Heart, Lung, 
and Blood Institute's Asthma Clinical Research Network.

Collaborators: Deykin A, Drazen JM, Israel E W, Wechsler ME, Kraft M, Martin RJ, 
Szefler SJ, Lemanske RF, Sorkness CA, Jarjour NN, Fish JE, Leone FT, Peters SP, 
Boushey HA, Fahy JV, Lazarus SC, Ford JG, DiMango E, Pesola GR, Calhoun WJ, 
Ameredes BT, Castro M, Walter MJ, Ramsdell J, Wasserman S, Bleecker E, Meyers D, 
Peters SP, Chinchilli VM, Craig TJ, King TS, Mauger EA.

Author information:
(1)National Jewish Health, Denver, CO 80206, USA. sutherlande@njhealth.org

BACKGROUND: Although obesity has been hypothesized to worsen asthma, data from 
studies of subjects with well-characterized asthma are lacking.
OBJECTIVE: We sought to evaluate the relationship between body mass index (BMI), 
asthma impairment, and response to therapy.
METHODS: BMI (in kilograms per meter squared) and asthma phenotypic and 
treatment response data were extracted from Asthma Clinical Research Network 
studies. The cross-sectional relationship between BMI and asthma impairment was 
analyzed, as was the longitudinal relationship between BMI and response to 
asthma controller therapies.
RESULTS: One thousand two hundred sixty-five subjects with mild-to-moderate 
persistent asthma were evaluated. Analyses of lean versus overweight/obese 
asthmatic subjects demonstrated small differences in FEV1 (3.05 vs 2.91 L, P = 
.001), FEV1/forced vital capacity ratio (mean, 83.5% vs 82.4%; P = .01), rescue 
albuterol use (1.1 vs 1.2 puffs per day, P = .03), and asthma-related quality of 
life (5.77 vs 5.59, P = .0004). Overweight/obese asthmatic subjects demonstrated 
a smaller improvement in exhaled nitric oxide levels with inhaled corticosteroid 
(ICS) treatment than did lean asthmatic subjects (3.6 vs 6.5 ppb, P = .04). With 
ICS/long-acting beta-agonist treatment, overweight/obese asthmatic subjects 
demonstrated smaller improvements in lung function than lean asthmatic subjects, 
with an 80 mL (P = .04) and 1.7% (P = .02) lesser improvement in FEV1 and 
FEV1/forced vital capacity ratio, respectively. Significant differences in 
therapeutic response to leukotriene modifiers between BMI categories were not 
observed.
CONCLUSIONS: Increased BMI is not associated with clinically significant 
worsening of impairment in subjects with mild-to-moderate persistent asthma. 
There is a modest association between increased BMI and reduced therapeutic 
effect of ICS-containing regimens in this patient population. Prospective 
studies evaluating the effect of being overweight or obese on treatment response 
in asthma are warranted.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jaci.2009.04.005
PMCID: PMC2743451
PMID: 19501235 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Clin Exp Allergy. 2009 Oct;39(10):1522-31. doi: 
10.1111/j.1365-2222.2009.03277.x. Epub 2009 May 22.

Effect of in vitro aspirin stimulation on basophils in patients with 
aspirin-exacerbated respiratory disease.

Celik GE(1), Schroeder JT, Hamilton RG, Saini SS, Adkinson NF.

Author information:
(1)Ankara University School of Medicine, Division of Allergy, Ankara, Turkey. 
gulfemcelik@gmail.com

Comment in
    Clin Exp Allergy. 2010 Mar;40(3):520; author reply 520-1. doi: 
10.1111/j.1365-2222.2009.03451.x.

BACKGROUND: Basophil activation has been implicated in the pathogenesis of 
aspirin-exacerbated respiratory disease (AERD). However, a comprehensive 
analysis of basophil responses to aspirin in terms of mediator release, cytokine 
secretion and increased expression of surface activation markers has not been 
performed.
OBJECTIVE: To study the in vitro effects of aspirin on the concurrent release of 
histamine, leukotriene C4 (LTC4) and IL-4 from human basophils and to also 
evaluate changes in surface activation markers (CD63, CD69 and CD203c) expressed 
by these cells.
METHODS: Basophil-enriched cell suspensions from 10 patients with AERD and 10 
healthy volunteers were incubated with lysine-aspirin for up to 3 h. Cells were 
analysed for expression of CD63, CD69 and CD203c using flow cytometry. Cell-free 
supernatants were evaluated for histamine, and LTC4 release and for IL-4 
secretion.
RESULTS: Aspirin-induced expression of CD63, CD69 and CD203c yielded 30%, 80% 
and 70% sensitivity, respectively, but with poor specificity. There was no 
significant difference in LTC4 synthesis between groups. None of the patients 
with AERD (or controls) released IL-4 in response to aspirin. A higher dose of 5 
mg/mL aspirin-mediated non-specific effects on basophils.
CONCLUSION: Basophil responses to in vitro aspirin challenge are poor indicators 
of clinical sensitivity. Aspirin activates some basophils by means of mechanisms 
that differ from the classical IgE-mediated pathway. Our study also shows that 
the use of 27 mm of aspirin (5 mg/mL) by previous investigators causes 
non-specific basophil activation, thereby eliminating its usefulness in a 
cell-based diagnostic test for AERD. Evaluation of in vitro basophil activation 
has low clinical value in identifying aspirin-induced respiratory reactions.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2222.2009.03277.x
PMCID: PMC2788679
PMID: 19486029 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


33. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2009 Sep;124(3):417-21. doi:
10.1016/j.jaci.2009.04.020.  Epub 2009 May 30.

Leukotriene E4: perspective on the forgotten mediator.

Lee TH(1), Woszczek G, Farooque SP.

Author information:
(1)MRC & Asthma UK Centre in Allergic Mechanisms of Asthma, King's College 
London, London, United Kingdom. tak.lee@kcl.ac.uk

Leukotriene (LT) E(4) mediates many of the principal features of bronchial 
asthma, such as bronchial constriction, hyperresponsiveness, eosinophilia, and 
increased vascular permeability. Furthermore, it is the most stable of the 
cysteinyl leukotrienes (CysLTs) and can be active at the site of release for a 
prolonged time after its synthesis. There might be several reasons why LTE(4) 
has been forgotten. LTE(4) demonstrated low affinity for CysLT(1) and CysLT(2) 
receptors in equilibrium competition assays. It was less potent than other 
CysLTs in functional assays, such as calcium flux, in cells transfected with 
CysLT(1) and CysLT(2). The introduction of CysLT(1) antagonists into clinical 
practice diverted interest into CysLT(1)-related mechanisms, which were mediated 
mainly by LTD(4). However, experiments with animal models and human studies have 
revealed that LTE(4) has unique characteristics that cannot be explained by the 
current knowledge of CysLT(1) and CysLT(2). These activities include its potency 
relative to other CysLTs to increase airway responsiveness to histamine, to 
enhance eosinophilic recruitment, and to increase vascular permeability. 
Asthmatic airways also demonstrate marked in vivo relative hyperresponsiveness 
to LTE(4), especially in patients with aspirin-sensitive respiratory disease. 
This has stimulated a search for additional LT receptors that would respond 
preferentially to LTE(4) stimulation.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jaci.2009.04.020
PMID: 19482346 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Inflamm Res. 2009 Jul;58(7):363-9. doi: 10.1007/s00011-009-0043-5. Epub 2009
May  6.

Lovastatin inhibits antigen-induced airway eosinophilia without affecting the 
production of inflammatory mediators in mice.

Chiba Y(1), Sato S, Misawa M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, School of Pharmacy, Hoshi University, 2-4-41 
Ebara, Shinagawa-ku, Tokyo 142-8501, Japan. chiba@hoshi.ac.jp

OBJECTIVE AND DESIGN: Statins have been proposed as a novel treatment of 
respiratory diseases. To determine the beneficial effects of statins on allergic 
bronchial asthma, the effect of systemic treatment with lovastatin on 
antigen-induced airway inflammation was investigated.
SUBJECTS: Male BALB/c mice were used.
TREATMENTS: Mice were sensitized and repeatedly challenged with ovalbumin (OA) 
antigen to induce asthmatic response. Animals were also treated with lovastatin 
(4 mg/kg/day, i.p.) once a day prior to and during the antigen inhalation 
period.
METHODS: Inflammatory cell counts and levels of interleukin (IL)-4, IL-13, 
eotaxin, thymus and activation-regulated chemokine and leukotriene B(4) (LTB(4)) 
in bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) fluids were measured.
RESULTS: Significant increases in eosinophils and levels of the T helper 2 
cytokines, chemokines and LTB(4) in BAL fluids in association with the 
increments of total and OA-specific immunoglobulin E (IgE) in sera were observed 
in the repeatedly antigen-challenged mice. The airway eosinophilia was 
ameliorated by lovastatin, whereas it had no significant effect on the levels of 
these inflammatory mediators or IgE.
CONCLUSION: Lovastatin may be beneficial for the treatment of allergic 
inflammatory diseases in the airways, such as allergic bronchial asthma.

DOI: 10.1007/s00011-009-0043-5
PMID: 19418204 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Allergy. 2009 Jun;64(6):823-39. doi: 10.1111/j.1398-9995.2009.02015.x. Epub
2009  Mar 26.

Leukotriene pathway genetics and pharmacogenetics in allergy.

Duroudier NP(1), Tulah AS, Sayers I.

Author information:
(1)Division of Therapeutics and Molecular Medicine, University of Nottingham, 
Nottingham, UK.

Leukotrienes (LT) are biologically active lipid mediators known to be involved 
in allergic inflammation. Leukotrienes have been shown to mediate diverse 
features of allergic conditions including inflammatory cell 
chemotaxis/activation and smooth muscle contraction. Cysteinyl leukotrienes 
(LTC(4), LTD(4) and, LTE(4)) and the dihydroxy leukotriene LTB(4) are generated 
by a series of enzymes/proteins constituting the LT synthetic pathway or 
5-lipoxygenase (5-LO) pathway. Their function is mediated by interacting with 
multiple receptors. Leukotriene receptor antagonists (LTRA) and LT synthesis 
inhibitors (LTSI) have shown clinical efficacy in asthma and more recently in 
allergic rhinitis. Despite growing knowledge of leukotriene biology, the 
molecular regulation of these inflammatory mediators remains to be fully 
understood. Genes encoding enzymes of the 5-LO pathway (i.e. ALOX5, LTC4S and 
LTA4H) and encoding for LT receptors (CYSLTR1/2 and LTB4R1/2) provide excellent 
candidates for disease susceptibility and severity; however, their role remains 
unclear. Preliminary data also suggest that 5-LO pathway/receptor gene 
polymorphism can predict patient responses to LTSI and LTRA; however, the exact 
mechanisms require elucidation. The aim of this review was to summarize the 
recent advances in the knowledge of these important mediators, focusing on 
genetic and pharmacogenetic aspects in the context of allergic phenotypes.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1398-9995.2009.02015.x
PMID: 19416143 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Curr Mol Med. 2009 Apr;9(3):383-91. doi: 10.2174/156652409787847209.

The role of leukotrienes in airway remodeling.

Mehrotra AK(1), Henderson WR Jr.

Author information:
(1)Center for Allergy and Inflammation, Division of Allergy and Infectious 
Diseases, Department of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington 
98109, USA.

Asthma is an inflammatory disorder of the airways that has been typified by its 
bronchospastic component. New attention has been directed to the long-term 
changes in asthmatic airways as indicated by the accelerated rate of lung 
function decline occurring in these patients despite therapy with inhaled 
corticosteroids. These structural changes in the airway wall, termed airway 
remodeling, are now thought to be a key component in the pathophysiology of 
asthma. Airway remodeling is characterized by thickening of the lamina 
reticularis with deposition of collagen and other extracellular matrix proteins 
leading to subepithelial fibrosis and increased airway goblet cells causing 
mucus hypersecretion. Of note, there is myofibroblast proliferation and 
increased airway smooth muscle mass caused by both hyperplasia and hypertrophy 
of smooth muscle cells. While an important role for cysteinyl leukotrienes 
(CysLTs) in the pathogenesis of airway inflammation and bronchoconstriction in 
asthma has been well-established, the specific role of CysLTs in airway 
remodeling is less clear. This aim of this review is to summarize the data from 
mouse models of asthma as well as limited human studies that demonstrate a key 
role for CysLTs in allergen-induced mucus hypersecretion, thickening of the 
lamina reticularis, and subepithelial fibrosis in the lungs. We will also focus 
on the interaction between CysLTs and cytokines/growth factors that mediate 
these changes in epithelial cells, smooth muscle cells, vasculature, and other 
structural components of the lungs in patients with asthma.

DOI: 10.2174/156652409787847209
PMID: 19355919 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol. 2009 Mar;102(3):253-5. doi: 
10.1016/S1081-1206(10)60089-0.

Does exhaled nitric oxide measurement have a role in asthma care?

Oppenheimer J(1), Sorkness CA.

Author information:
(1)Pulmonary and Allergy Associates, New Jersey Medical School, Cedar Knolls, 
New Jersey 07927, USA. nallopp@optonline.net

DOI: 10.1016/S1081-1206(10)60089-0
PMID: 19354073 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Pharmacogenomics. 2009 Mar;10(3):327-30. doi: 10.2217/14622416.10.3.327.

Understanding clinical variability in response to asthma treatment.

Kukreti R, Guleria R.

DOI: 10.2217/14622416.10.3.327
PMID: 19294813 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Am J Hematol. 2009 Apr;84(4):231-3. doi: 10.1002/ajh.21370.

Urinary cysteinyl leukotriene E4 significantly increases during pain in children 
and adults with sickle cell disease.

Field JJ(1), Strunk RC, Knight-Perry JE, Blinder MA, Townsend RR, DeBaun MR.

Author information:
(1)Division of Hematology, Department of Internal Medicine, Washington 
University School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri 63110, USA. 
jfield@dom.wustl.edu

Baseline level of the cysteinyl leukotriene (CysLT), leukotriene E4 (LTE4), is 
associated with an increased pain rate in children and adults with sickle cell 
disease (SCD). To provide additional evidence for a role of CysLTs in the 
pathogenesis of vaso-occlusion, we tested the hypothesis that LTE4 levels will 
increase within an individual during painful episodes compared to baseline. In a 
cohort of 19 children and adults with SCD, median LTE4 levels increased from 
82.36 pg/mg creatinine at baseline to 162.81 pg/mg creatinine during a painful 
episode (P < 0.001). These data further support a contribution of CysLTs to the 
process of vaso-occlusion.

Copyright 2009 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajh.21370
PMID: 19291727 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


40. J Chromatogr B Analyt Technol Biomed Life Sci. 2009 May 1;877(13):1272-80.
doi:  10.1016/j.jchromb.2009.01.036. Epub 2009 Feb 2.

LC/MS/MS analysis of leukotriene B4 and other eicosanoids in exhaled breath 
condensate for assessing lung inflammation.

Montuschi P(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Faculty of Medicine, Catholic University of the 
Sacred Heart, Largo Francesco Vito 1, Rome 00168, Italy. 
pmontuschi@rm.unicatt.it

Leukotriene (LT) B(4) is a potent inflammatory lipid mediator that has been 
involved in the pathophysiology of respiratory diseases including asthma. 
Exhaled breath condensate (EBC) is a non-invasive method to sample secretions 
from the airways. LC/MS/MS techniques for measuring LTB(4) concentrations in EBC 
have been developed and are suitable for an accurate quantitative assessment of 
its concentrations in EBC. LC/MS/MS for other eicosanoids including 
8-isoprostane, a marker of oxidative stress, and cysteinyl-LTs have been 
developed. This article, mainly focused on LTB(4), presents the analytical 
aspects of the LC/MS/MS techniques for measuring LTB(4) and 8-isoprostane in 
EBC, provides examples of their application to the assessment of airway 
inflammation in patients with asthma and other respiratory diseases, and 
discusses their potential utility for non-invasive monitoring of drug therapy.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jchromb.2009.01.036
PMID: 19233745 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol. 2009 Feb;102(2):103-9. doi: 
10.1016/S1081-1206(10)60238-4.

Exhaled leukotrienes and bronchial responsiveness to methacholine in patients 
with seasonal allergic rhinitis.

Cap P(1), Maly M, Pehal F, Pelikan Z.

Author information:
(1)Department of Allergology and Clinical Immunology, "Na Homolce" Hospital, 
Institute for Postgraduate Medical Education, Prague, Czech Republic. 
petr.cap@homolka.cz

BACKGROUND: Allergic rhinitis and bronchial asthma can coexist and affect each 
other.
OBJECTIVE: To investigate the relationship between the postseasonal increase in 
the concentration of leukotriene (LT) B4 and LTE4 in exhaled breath condensate 
(EBC) and bronchial responsiveness to methacholine (BRM) in patients with 
seasonal allergic rhinitis (SAR).
METHODS: In 28 patients with SAR and 50 healthy study patients, the leukotrienes 
were measured in EBC during and after the pollen season by gas 
chromatography/mass spectrometry. The BRM was determined after the pollen 
season.
RESULTS: In 7 patients with SAR, significantly increased concentrations of both 
the leukotrienes were found in EBC during and 5 months after the pollen season. 
The following seasonal and postseasonal median values were measured in patients 
with SAR in comparison with control patients: LTB4: 131 and 90 pg/mL vs 80 and 
79 pg/mL, P < .001 and P = .03, respectively; LTE4: 122 and 86 pg/mL vs 76 and 
74 pg/mL, P < .001 and P = .02, respectively. Five months after the pollen 
season, the concentrations of LTB4 and LTE4 decreased with respect to their 
seasonal values (90 and 86 pg/mL, respectively, P < .001, for both 
leukotrienes). In 7 patients with SAR and leukotriene levels exceeding the 
reference limits, significantly increased BRM was also found (LTB4: P = .02; 
LTE4: P = .002).
CONCLUSIONS: The seasonal and postseasonal increases in LTB4 and LTE4 
concentrations in EBC of the patients with SAR correlated significantly with the 
later increase in BMR. This relationship could provide a useful predictive 
parameter for early inflammatory processes in the lower airways of patients with 
allergic rhinitis.

DOI: 10.1016/S1081-1206(10)60238-4
PMID: 19230459 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Clin Exp Allergy. 2009 Apr;39(4):491-9. doi:
10.1111/j.1365-2222.2008.03190.x.  Epub 2009 Feb 10.

Chemokine CC-ligand 5 production and eosinophil activation into the upper 
airways of aspirin-sensitive patients.

Fuentes-Beltrán A(1), Montes-Vizuet R, Valencia-Maqueda E, Negrete-García MC, 
García-Cruz Mde L, Teran LM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Immunogenetics and Allergy, Instituto Nacional de Enfermedades 
Respiratorias, Calzada Tlalpan, México.

BACKGROUND: Airway eosinophilia is a hallmark of aspirin-sensitive 
asthma/rhinitis.
OBJECTIVE: We have investigated chemokine CC-ligand 5 (CCL5) production and its 
association with eosinophil activation in the upper airways of aspirin-sensitive 
patients both in vivo and in vitro.
METHODS: Twenty aspirin-sensitive asthma/rhinosinusitis patients, 18 
atopic-tolerant asthma/rhinosinusitis patients and 15 healthy control subjects 
took part in the study. All subjects were challenged with saline and 
lysine-acetylsalicylic acid (L-asa) on separate occasions. Nasal lavages were 
obtained at baseline and 120 min after challenge and analysed for mediators' 
release.
RESULTS: When compared with control subjects, the baseline levels of CCL5 were 
significantly increased in both sensitive and tolerant patients (there was no 
significant difference in CCL5 concentrations between these two groups, P>0.05). 
However, L-asa nasal challenge induced significantly increased levels of CCL5 in 
the sensitive patients but not in the tolerant subjects (median: 380 vs. 140 
pg/mL, P<0.0001). Similarly, the concentrations of both eosinophil cationic 
protein (ECP) and cysteinil leukotriene (cys-LTs) were increased significantly 
in the aspirin-sensitive but not in the tolerant patients. There was a trend 
towards a significant correlation between CCL5 and ECP concentrations in the 
sensitive patients following L-ASA challenge. On incubation with aspirin, nasal 
tissue derived from aspirin-sensitive but not that derived from tolerant 
subjects released increased CCL5 levels in culture. As determined by 
immunohistochemistry, CCL5 was predominantly localized to the nasal airway 
epithelium.
CONCLUSION: Altogether, these findings suggest that CCL5 is released in 
aspirin-sensitive asthma/rhinosinusitis.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2222.2008.03190.x
PMID: 19226274 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol. 2009 Jan;102(1):16-21. doi: 
10.1016/S1081-1206(10)60102-0.

Cysteinyl-leukotrienes in asthmatic airway smooth muscle cell hyperplasia.

Bossé Y(1), Stankova J, Rola-Pleszczynski M.

Author information:
(1)The James Hogg iCAPTURE Centre for Cardiovascular and Pulmonary Research, 
Providence Health Care/St. Paul's Hospital, University of British Columbia, 
Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada. ybosse@mrl.ubc.ca

OBJECTIVE: To present a historic perspective and an up-to-date understanding of 
the involvement of cysteinyl-leukotrienes (cys-LTs) in asthmatic airway smooth 
muscle (ASM) cell hyperplasia.
DATA SOURCES: Data collected from human tissues, from animal models of airway 
inflammation, and from ASM cells cultured in vitro are included.
STUDY SELECTION: All studies regarding the potential contribution of cys-LTs on 
ASM cell hyperplasia are reviewed.
RESULTS: Whereas in vivo observations are consistent and seem to attribute an 
important role for cys-LTs in ASM cell hyperplasia, the observations made in 
cultured ASM cells are inconsistent, with studies documenting a mitogenic 
potential only reporting marginal effects.
CONCLUSION: This dichotomy between in vitro and in vivo results led to the 
elaboration of a hypothesis suggesting that the mitogenic effect of cys-LTs on 
ASM cells may be indirect and mediated by a paracrine loop involving 
transforming growth factor beta1 production by airway resident and inflammatory 
cells.

DOI: 10.1016/S1081-1206(10)60102-0
PMID: 19205280 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Allergol Int. 2009 Mar;58(1):89-96. doi: 10.2332/allergolint.08-OA-0014. Epub
 2009 Jan 25.

Molecular mechanism of the additive effects of leukotriene modifier in asthmatic 
patients receiving steroid therapy.

Matsunaga K(1), Yanagisawa S, Ichikawa T, Akamatsu K, Koarai A, Hirano T, 
Sugiura H, Minakata Y, Ichinose M.

Author information:
(1)Third Department of Internal Medicine, Wakayama Medical University, School of 
Medicine, Wakayama, Japan.

BACKGROUND: The addition of leukotriene modifier (LM) may be a useful approach 
for uncontrollable asthma despite treatment with inhaled corticosteroid (ICS), 
especially in asthmatics comorbid with allergic rhinitis (AR), although little 
is known about its molecular mechanism. We evaluated the additive effects of LM 
with ICS on pulmonary function and airway inflammation in asthmatics with or 
without AR.
METHODS: Eighteen uncontrolled steroid-treated asthmatics, nine with and nine 
without AR, were enrolled. Spirometry, peak expiratory flow (PEF) measurements, 
and exhaled breath condensate sampling were performed before and 8 weeks after 
LM administration. The lowest PEF over the course of one week, expressed as a 
percentage of the highest PEF (Min%Max PEF), was used as an index of fluctuation 
of the airway caliber. Airway cytokine expression was analyzed with a protein 
array.
RESULTS: A significant improvement in forced expiratory volume in one second as 
a percentage of the predicted value (%FEV(1)) and Min%Max PEF was seen in the 
subgroup of asthma with AR. Although there was no significant difference in the 
baseline cytokine values between the groups, the exhaled RANTES level was 
significantly reduced by LM in the asthma with AR group. The changes in the 
RANTES level were significantly related to the changes in the %FEV(1) and 
Min%Max PEF values.
CONCLUSIONS: LM caused a greater improvement in pulmonary function and airway 
inflammation in asthmatics with AR. The RANTES-mediated pathway may be involved 
in the improvement of the airflow limitation and airway lability by LM additive 
therapy in asthmatics receiving steroid therapy.

DOI: 10.2332/allergolint.08-OA-0014
PMID: 19153534 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Respirology. 2009 Jan;14(1):39-45. doi: 10.1111/j.1440-1843.2008.01414.x.

Changes in the proteome of human bronchial epithelial cells following 
stimulation with leucotriene E4 and transforming growth factor-beta1.

Altraja S(1), Jaama J, Valk E, Altraja A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pulmonary Medicine, Institute of General and Molecular 
Pathology, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia. alan@kliinikum.ee

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: Activated bronchial epithelial cells exert 
considerable potential to maintain a microenvironment in the airway wall that 
promotes airway inflammation and remodelling. Cysteinyl leucotrienes (CysLT) and 
transforming growth factor-beta(1) (TGF-beta(1)) are both increased in asthmatic 
airways and may influence the pathophysiology of disease. However, the 
consequences of activation of bronchial epithelial cells by these mediators are 
not fully understood. A proteomic-based approach was used to characterize the 
inflammatory pathways in bronchial epithelial cells after stimulation with CysLT 
and TGF-beta(1).
METHODS: Human bronchial epithelial cells (BEAS-2B) were stimulated with 1 ng/mL 
TGF-beta(1) and 50 nmol/L leucotriene E(4) (LTE(4)) for 48 h and whole-cell 
lysates were subjected to two-dimensional gel electrophoresis. Proteins showing 
statistically significant differential expression were identified by 
matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization time-of-flight mass spectrometry and 
database searching.
RESULTS: Stimulation with LTE(4) increased the expression of three proteins and 
five proteins showed decreased expression. Of the latter group, two were 
definitively identified as heat shock protein (Hsp90 alpha) and stress-70 
protein. Hsp90 alpha forms a heterocomplex with the glucocorticoid receptor (GR) 
and a significant decrease in GR following LTE(4) stimulation was confirmed. 
TGF-beta(1) downregulated 18 intracellular proteins, including lamin A/C, 
glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase, protein DJ-1, voltage-dependent 
calcium channel gamma-7 subunit, heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein A2/B1 
and stress-70 protein.
CONCLUSIONS: The current findings suggest that by downregulating GR and Hsp90 
alpha, CysLT may interfere with the action of glucocorticoids. Overall, the 
results confirm the complex role of bronchial epithelium in aspects of airway 
inflammation and remodelling.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1440-1843.2008.01414.x
PMID: 19144047 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Prostaglandins Other Lipid Mediat. 2009 Sep;89(3-4):120-5. doi: 
10.1016/j.prostaglandins.2008.12.003. Epub 2008 Dec 14.

On the biosynthesis and biological role of eoxins and 15-lipoxygenase-1 in 
airway inflammation and Hodgkin lymphoma.

Claesson HE(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics, Division of Physiological 
Chemistry II, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm and Orexo AB, Uppsala, Sweden. 
hans-erik.claesson@ki.se

This mini-review is focused on the enzyme 15-lipoxygenase-1 (15-LO-1) and eoxins 
in airway inflammatory diseases and Hodgkin lymphoma. Several studies have 
demonstrated increased expression and activity of 15-LO-1 in the respiratory 
tissue from asthma patients , indicating a pathophysiological role of this 
enzyme in airway inflammation. Eoxins were recently identified as 
pro-inflammatory metabolites of arachidonic acid, formed through the 15-LO-1 
pathway, in human eosinophils, mast cells, airway epithelial cells and Hodgkin 
lymphoma. Mice deficient of 12/15-LO, the ortholog to human 15-LO-1, had an 
attenuated allergic airway inflammation compared to wild type controls, also 
indicating a pathophysiological role of this enzyme in respiratory inflammation. 
The putative therapeutic implications of 15-LO-1 inhibitors in the treatment of 
asthma, chronic obstructive pulmonary disorder and Hodgkin lymphoma are 
discussed.

DOI: 10.1016/j.prostaglandins.2008.12.003
PMID: 19130894 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Clin Exp Allergy. 2009 Jan;39(1):72-80. doi:
10.1111/j.1365-2222.2008.03104.x.

Increased production of cysteinyl leukotrienes and prostaglandin D2 during human 
anaphylaxis.

Ono E(1), Taniguchi M, Mita H, Fukutomi Y, Higashi N, Miyazaki E, Kumamoto T, 
Akiyama K.

Author information:
(1)Clinical Research Center for Allergy and Rheumatology, National Hospital 
Organization, Sagamihara National Hospital, Sagamihara, Kanagawa, Japan. 
e-ono@sagamihara-hosp.gr.jp

Comment in
    Clin Exp Allergy. 2009 Jan;39(1):5-7. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2222.2008.03136.x.

BACKGROUND: Anaphylaxis is a life-threatening syndrome resulting from the sudden 
release of mast cell- and basophil-derived mediators into the circulation. 
However, pathological evidence of the association between inflammatory mediators 
and human anaphylaxis is insufficient.
OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study was to better understand the relationship 
between in vivo production of inflammatory mediators and the pathogenesis of 
anaphylaxis. We also sought to evaluate mast cell activation in anaphylaxis.
METHODS: We measured the concentrations of various inflammatory mediators in 
urine samples, which were collected from 32 anaphylactic patients during the 
onset of anaphylaxis and during clinical remission, 21 patients with asthma on 
acute exacerbation and 15 healthy control subjects. Blood and urine specimens 
were collected from the patients after provocation test. Urinary leukotriene E4 
(LTE4), 9alpha, 11beta-prostaglandin F2 (9alpha, 11beta-PGF2), 
eosinophil-derived neurotoxin (EDN) and leukotriene B4 glucuronide (LTBG) 
concentrations were determined by enzyme immunoassay, and the activity of plasma 
platelet-activating factor acetylhydrolase and serum tryptase concentration were 
measured using commercially available kits.
RESULTS: Significantly higher concentrations of urinary LTE4 and 9alpha, 
11beta-PGF2, which immediately decreased during clinical remission, were 
observed in the anaphylactic patients than in asthmatic patients on acute 
exacerbation and healthy control subjects. Concentrations of EDN and LTBG were 
not significantly different among the anaphylactic patients, asthmatic patients 
on acute exacerbation and healthy subjects. There was a significant correlation 
between urinary LTE4 and 9alpha, 11beta-PGF2 concentrations in the anaphylactic 
patients (r=0.672, P=0.005, n=32). In addition, LTE4 concentration in patients 
with anaphylactic shock is significantly elevated compared with that in patients 
without anaphylactic shock.
CONCLUSIONS: This is a report on the significant increase in urinary LTE4 and 
9alpha, 11beta-PGF2 concentrations during anaphylaxis. Urinary LTE4 and 9alpha, 
11beta-PGF2 concentrations may be a reliable marker of endogenous production of 
inflammatory mediators associated with anaphylaxis.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2222.2008.03104.x
PMID: 19128354 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Int Arch Allergy Immunol. 2009;149(2):127-32. doi: 10.1159/000189195. Epub
2009  Jan 6.

Increases in urinary 9alpha,11beta-prostaglandin f2 indicate mast cell 
activation in wine-induced asthma.

Misso NL(1), Aggarwal S, Thompson PJ, Vally H.

Author information:
(1)Lung Institute of Western Australia Inc., Centre for Asthma, Allergy and 
Respiratory Research, Ground Floor, E Block, Sir Charles Gairdner Hospital, 
Verdun Street, Nedlands, W.A. 6009, Australia. nmisso@liwa.uwa.edu.au

BACKGROUND: Wine-induced asthmatic symptoms may be caused by sulphite additives. 
Prostaglandin (PG)D2 and cysteinyl leukotrienes (cysLT) are important mediators 
of asthmatic responses. To determine whether the sulphite additives in wine 
alter the production of PGD2 and cysLT, asthmatic patients with compelling 
histories of wine sensitivity were challenged with high- and low-sulphite wines; 
the urinary metabolites of PGD2 and cysLT were measured before and after 
challenge.
METHODS: Eight self-reporting wine-sensitive asthmatic patients completed 
double-blind challenges with high- and low-sulphite wines on separate days. 
Urine samples were collected before and after consumption of 150 ml of wine. 
Urinary concentrations of 9alpha,11beta-PGF2 and leukotriene (LT)E4 were 
measured by enzyme immunoassay.
RESULTS: Urinary 9alpha,11beta-PGF2 concentrations increased in all subjects 
following challenge with high-sulphite wine, and the median concentration 
increased 1.6-fold (p < 0.01). Urinary 9alpha,11beta-PGF2 also increased 
1.5-fold after low-sulphite wine challenge, although this did not reach 
statistical significance (p = 0.08). The median difference in 9alpha,11beta-PGF2 
concentration after high-sulphite wine challenge was not significantly different 
compared with that after low-sulphite wine challenge. Median urinary LTE4 
concentrations did not change significantly after either wine challenge.
CONCLUSIONS: Increased urinary 9alpha,11beta-PGF2 concentrations following wine 
challenge suggest mast cell activation as a possible mechanism for wine-induced 
asthma, although this did not appear to be related to the sulphite additives in 
wine. Urinary 9alpha,11beta-PGF2 may warrant further assessment as a potential 
biomarker of reactivity to wine in asthmatic subjects.

Copyright 2009 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000189195
PMID: 19127069 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Respir Med. 2009 May;103(5):750-6. doi: 10.1016/j.rmed.2008.11.009. Epub 2008
 Dec 24.

Exhaled cysteinyl-leukotrienes and 8-isoprostane in patients with asthma and 
their relation to clinical severity.

Samitas K(1), Chorianopoulos D, Vittorakis S, Zervas E, Economidou E, 
Papatheodorou G, Loukides S, Gaga M.

Author information:
(1)7th Department of Respiratory Medicine, Sotiria General Hospital, Athens, 
Greece.

BACKGROUND: Collection of exhaled breath condensate (EBC) is a safe, 
non-invasive method to collect droplets of the airway surface liquid and measure 
mediators of airway inflammation and oxidative stress, such as 
cysteinyl-leukotrienes (cys-LTs) and 8-isoprostane.
OBJECTIVE: The aim of our study was to investigate baseline values of 
inflammatory lipid mediators in EBC and their relation to asthma severity.
METHODS: Nineteen healthy subjects, 16 mild, 12 moderate and 15 severe 
asthmatics were studied. All subjects attended a clinic visit for spirometry and 
EBC collection. The concentrations of exhaled cys-LTs and 8-isoprostane were 
measured by means of specific enzyme immunoassays.
RESULTS: 8-isoprostane levels were significantly increased in mild (49.1+/-5.2 
pg/mL, p<0.001), moderate (49.7+/-5.2 pg/mL, p<0.001) and severe asthmatics 
(77.7+/-7.3 pg/mL, p<0.001), compared to healthy controls (16.4+/-1.6 pg/mL). 
Moreover, 8-isoprostane levels were significantly higher in severe compared to 
mild and moderate asthmatics (p<0.01). Cys-LT levels were significantly higher 
in moderate (34.6+/-4.4 pg/mL, p<0.05) and severe asthmatics (47.9+/-6.0 pg/mL, 
p<0.001), while no significant difference was found between healthy controls and 
mild asthmatics. 8-isoprostane levels in EBC of asthmatics strongly correlated 
with cys-LT levels (r=0.61, p<0.0001).
CONCLUSIONS: 8-isoprostane and cys-LT are detectable in EBC of healthy subjects 
and their levels progressively increase in asthmatic patients according to 
disease severity. The correlation found between these two lipid mediators 
indicating a link between oxidative stress and airway inflammation.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rmed.2008.11.009
PMID: 19110408 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Curr Opin Pulm Med. 2009 Jan;15(1):12-8. doi: 10.1097/MCP.0b013e32831de235.

Biomarkers in asthma.

Murugan A(1), Prys-Picard C, Calhoun WJ.

Author information:
(1)Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, University of Texas Medical Branch, 
Galveston, Texas 77555-0568, USA.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: The purpose of this review is to highlight seminal and 
current literature that informs our understanding of the clinical and 
investigative utility of biomarkers in asthma. Biomarkers derive from a variety 
of sources [bronchiolar lavage (BAL), sputum, exhaled breath, and blood], and 
have widely variant performance characteristics, and applicability.
RECENT FINDINGS: Increasing attention is given to biomarkers in exhaled breath, 
both gaseous (exhaled nitric oxide) and higher molecular weight moieties [in 
exhaled breath condensate (EBC)]. Current research in EBC analysis has focused 
on validation, standardization, and technical considerations, whereas research 
on exhaled nitric oxide (ENO) has moved to testing its predictive value in 
clinical situations. The use of advanced biostatistical techniques, and 
combinatorial analyses has led to additional advances in the utility of 
biomarkers.
SUMMARY: To date, the best validated, and best performing biomarkers for 
clinical asthma appear to be measures of inflammation in induced sputum, and 
measures of ENO. Some trials using ENO appear particularly promising for early 
clinical use. EBC metrics are at present too inchoate for clinical purposes. 
However, not all important clinical and research questions can be addressed with 
sputum, EBC, or ENO metrics, leaving an important place for BAL, bronchial 
biopsy, and perhaps EBC measurements in the research arena.

DOI: 10.1097/MCP.0b013e32831de235
PMID: 19077700 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Curr Allergy Asthma Rep. 2009 Jan;9(1):18-25. doi: 10.1007/s11882-009-0003-8.

Role of leukotrienes in exercise-induced bronchoconstriction.

Hallstrand TS(1), Henderson WR Jr.

Author information:
(1)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care, University of Washington, Seattle, 
WA 98195, USA. tealh@u.washington.edu

Exercise-induced bronchoconstriction (EIB) refers to acute airflow obstruction 
that is triggered by a period of physical exertion. EIB occurs mainly in 
individuals with other features of asthma but is especially prominent in a 
subset of asthmatics with pronounced indirect airway hyperresponsiveness. 
Leukotrienes (LTs) play a critical role in the pathophysiology of EIB. 
Asthmatics who are susceptible to EIB have increased levels of cysteinyl LTs 
(cysLTs [ie, LTs C4, D4, and E4]) in induced sputum and exhaled breath 
condensate. Exercise challenge in individuals susceptible to this disorder 
initiates the sustained increase in cysLTs in the airways and an increase in the 
ratio of cysLTs to prostaglandin E(2). The effects of cysLTs leading to secreted 
mucin release and smooth muscle constriction may be mediated in part through 
activation of sensory nerves. Therapies that block cysLT production or the 
cysLT(1) receptor effectively reduce the severity of EIB.

DOI: 10.1007/s11882-009-0003-8
PMID: 19063820 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Clin Nutr. 2009 Feb;28(1):71-7. doi: 10.1016/j.clnu.2008.10.012. Epub 2008
Dec  2.

Eicosapentaenoic acid is more effective than docosahexaenoic acid in inhibiting 
proinflammatory mediator production and transcription from LPS-induced human 
asthmatic alveolar macrophage cells.

Mickleborough TD(1), Tecklenburg SL, Montgomery GS, Lindley MR.

Author information:
(1)Exercise Biochemistry Laboratory, Department of Kinesiology, Indiana 
University, Bloomington, IN 47401, USA. tmickleb@indiana.edu

BACKGROUND & AIMS: The purpose of the study was to determine which of the active 
constituents of fish oil, eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA) or docosahexaenoic acid 
(DHA), is most effective in suppressing proinflammatory mediator generation and 
cytokine expression from LPS-stimulated human asthmatic alveolar macrophages 
(AMphi).
METHODS: The AMphi were obtained from twenty-one asthmatic adults using 
fiberoptic bronchoscopy. Cells were pretreated with DMEM, pure EPA, an EPA-rich 
media (45% EPA/10% DHA), pure DHA, a DHA-rich media (10% EPA/50% DHA) or 
Lipovenos (n-6 PUFA), and then exposed to Dulbecco's Modified Eagle's Medium 
(DMEM) (-) or LPS (+). Supernatants were analyzed for leukotriene (LT)B(4), 
prostaglandin (PG)D(2), tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-alpha and interleukin 
(IL)-1beta production. Detection of TNF-alpha and IL-1beta mRNA expression 
levels was quantified by reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction.
RESULTS: 120 microM pure EPA and EPA-rich media significantly (p<0.05) 
suppressed TNF-alpha and IL-1beta mRNA expression and the production of LTB(4), 
PGD(2) and TNF-alpha and IL-1beta in LPS-stimulated primary AMphi cells obtained 
from asthmatic patients to a much greater extent than 120 microM pure DHA and 
DHA-rich media respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: This study has shown for the first time that EPA is a more potent 
inhibitor than DHA of inflammatory responses in human asthmatic AMphi cells.

DOI: 10.1016/j.clnu.2008.10.012
PMID: 19054597 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


53. J Leukoc Biol. 2009 Mar;85(3):544-52. doi: 10.1189/jlb.0508283. Epub 2008 Nov
 26.

Expression of kinin receptors on eosinophils: comparison of asthmatic patients 
and healthy subjects.

Bertram CM(1), Misso NL, Fogel-Petrovic M, Figueroa CD, Foster PS, Thompson PJ, 
Bhoola KD.

Author information:
(1)Lung Institute of Western Australia, Centre for Asthma, Allergy and 
Respiratory Research, The University of Western Australia, Perth, Australia.

Eosinophils contribute to asthmatic airway inflammation by releasing cysteinyl 
leukotrienes (cysLT) and other inflammatory mediators, and bradykinin (BK) 
induces bronchoconstriction in asthmatic patients. The aims of this study were 
to investigate kinin receptor expression on eosinophils of asthmatic and healthy 
subjects and to assess the effects of kinin stimulation on eosinophils, which 
were isolated from peripheral blood of asthmatic (n=27) and healthy subjects 
(n=14). Kinin B(1) and B(2) receptors (B(1)R and B(2)R, respectively) and mRNA 
expression were investigated by quantitative confocal microscopy, flow 
cytometry, and RT-PCR. Intracellular Ca(2+) was assessed by live-cell 
fluorescence confocal microscopy. Production of cysLT and eosinophil migration 
in response to BK and Lys-des[Arg(9)]-BK were assessed. Eosinophils expressed 
kinin B(1)R and B(2)R mRNA and proteins. Quantitative immunofluorescence 
analysis indicated that expression of B(1)R and B(2)R proteins was significantly 
greater in eosinophils of asthmatic patients compared with those of nonasthmatic 
subjects. However, kinin B(1)R and B(2)R mRNA expression did not differ 
significantly between these groups. Expression of kinin B(1)R and mRNA was 
decreased in patients using high doses of inhaled corticosteroids and in 
eosinophils treated with a corticosteroid in vitro. Kinin B(1) and B(2) agonists 
up-regulated expression of their respective receptors but did not increase 
intracellular Ca(2+) or the production of cysLT or enhance eosinophil migration 
significantly. Up-regulation of kinin receptor expression in eosinophils of 
asthmatic patients may be a consequence of inflammation, whereby enhanced 
release of kinin peptides has a positive-feedback effect on kinin receptor 
expression. Importantly, anti-inflammatory corticosteroids down-regulated the 
expression of the kinin B(1)R.

DOI: 10.1189/jlb.0508283
PMID: 19038786 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Int Arch Allergy Immunol. 2009;149(1):58-64. doi: 10.1159/000176307. Epub
2008  Nov 26.

Cellular allergen stimulation test with acetylsalicylic acid-lysine is not a 
useful test to discriminate between asthmatic patients with and without 
acetylsalicylic acid sensitivity.

Bavbek S(1), Dursun AB, Birben E, Kalayci O, Misirligil Z.

Author information:
(1)Department of Allergy, Ankara University, Turkey. 
bavbek@medicine.ankara.edu.tr

BACKGROUND: The aspirin provocation test, considered to be the gold standard in 
the diagnosis of aspirin sensitivity, may be associated with severe adverse 
reactions; thus, alternative procedures with a higher safety profile are highly 
desirable. Although the cellular antigen stimulation test (CAST) has been 
proposed to be such an alternative, there is limited information about its 
clinical usefulness.
OBJECTIVE: It was the aim of our study to evaluate the clinical usefulness of 
CAST in the diagnosis of aspirin sensitivity.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: Patients with aspirin-sensitive asthma and/or nasal polyps 
(n = 40), patients with aspirin-tolerant asthma and/or nasal polyps (n = 13) and 
healthy volunteers (n = 26) were included. A 2-day, single-blind 
placebo-controlled oral aspirin provocation test was performed. In vitro release 
of cysteinyl leukotrienes (Cys-LTs) by peripheral blood leukocytes was measured 
after stimulation with both stimulation buffer and lysine aspirin (2.5 mg/ml) by 
CAST.
RESULTS: Baseline Cys-LT levels were similar among the 3 groups. After lysine 
aspirin stimulation, the net increase in Cys-LTs was significantly higher in 
patients with aspirin sensitivity (median 91 pg/ml, interquartile range 22-206) 
compared with aspirin-tolerant patients (20 pg/ml, range 0-46) and healthy 
controls (23 pg/ml, range 0-71; p = 0.004). The assay had a sensitivity of 25%, 
a specificity of 92.3%, and positive and negative predictive values of 28.7 and 
90.7%, respectively.
CONCLUSION: Although the leukocytes of patients with aspirin sensitivity produce 
higher amounts of Cys-LTs as measured by CAST, the low sensitivity and 
predictive values limit the clinical usefulness of this test in the diagnosis of 
aspirin sensitivity.

2008 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000176307
PMID: 19033733 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Int Arch Allergy Immunol. 2009;148(4):321-9. doi: 10.1159/000170386. Epub
2008  Nov 11.

Effect of n-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids in asthma after low-dose allergen 
challenge.

Schubert R(1), Kitz R, Beermann C, Rose MA, Lieb A, Sommerer PC, Moskovits J, 
Alberternst H, Böhles HJ, Schulze J, Zielen S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics/ZAFES, J.W. Goethe University, Frankfurt/Main, 
Germany.

BACKGROUND: We investigated the anti-inflammatory potential of n-3 
polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFA) on specific bronchial inflammation. Allergic 
asthmatics were challenged using a low-dose allergen provocation model.
METHODS: Our parallel double-blinded study randomly assigned 23 house dust 
mite-allergic asthmatics (aged 22-29 years; 13 females, 10 males) to dietary 
supplementation with either an n-3 PUFA-enriched fat blend (0.69 g/day) or 
placebo for 5 weeks. After 3 weeks, the patients were challenged daily with low 
doses of mite allergen for 2 weeks. Primary outcome parameters were effects on 
lung function (forced expiratory volume in 1 s, FEV(1)) and exhaled nitric oxide 
(eNO) as a marker of bronchial inflammation.
RESULTS: Even before the bronchial challenge, eNO was significantly lower in the 
n-3 PUFA group (p=0.014). Levels of eNO increased during allergen exposure in 
both groups, but differences in means were significantly lower in the n-3 PUFA 
group (p=0.022). During the low-dose allergen challenge, there were no 
differences between the groups with regard to symptoms, FEV(1) or the allergen 
dose required to induce deterioration of lung function (PD(20)). Numbers of 
sputum eosinophils did not differ significantly, while serum eosinophils 
(10.1+/-0.1.84 vs. 5.79+/-0.69%) as well as changes in eosinophilic cationic 
protein (20.5+/-9.93 vs. -1.68+/-4.36 ng/ml) and in vitro cysteinyl leukotriene 
release (2,889+/-872 vs. 1,120+/-173 ng/ml) were significantly lower in the n-3 
PUFA group (p<0.05 each).
CONCLUSION: Our results provide evidence that dietary supplementation with n-3 
PUFA is able to reduce bronchial inflammation even after low-dose allergen 
challenge.

Copyright 2008 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000170386
PMID: 19001792 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Int Arch Allergy Immunol. 2009;148(3):251-60. doi: 10.1159/000161585. Epub
2008  Oct 10.

Safety and immunogenicity of a cluster specific immunotherapy in children with 
bronchial asthma and mite allergy.

Schubert R(1), Eickmeier O, Garn H, Baer PC, Mueller T, Schulze J, Rose MA, 
Rosewich M, Renz H, Zielen S.

Author information:
(1)Paediatric Pulmonology and Allergology, Department of Internal Medicine III, 
J.W. Goethe University, Frankfurt am Main, Germany. ralf.schubert@kgu.de

BACKGROUND: Cluster specific immunotherapy (SIT) is a modern form of allergen 
immunotherapy allowing safe administration of high allergen doses in a short 
time interval compared to classic SIT. In the current study, we investigated the 
safety profile and immunological effect of cluster SIT in children with allergic 
asthma due to house dust mite allergy.
METHODS: A total of 34 children (6-18 years) with allergic asthma were assigned 
to cluster (n = 22) or classic SIT (n = 12). To achieve a maintenance dose of 
allergen extract, cluster patients received 14 injections of house dust mite 
allergen within 6 weeks, whereas the classic SIT group received 14 injections 
within 14 weeks. Safety was monitored by recording adverse events. 
Immunogenicity was measured by specific IgG(Mite) and IgG4(Mite), by 
antibody-blocking properties on basophil activation, and by the T cell subset 
transcription factors Foxp3, T-bet, and GATA-3.
RESULTS: There were no significant differences in local and systemic side 
effects between the two groups. In the cluster group, serum levels of specific 
IgG(Mite) (p < 0.001) and specific IgG4(Mite) (p < 0.001) significantly 
increased after 8 weeks, while it took 12 weeks in the classic SIT group. These 
data were confirmed by blocking CD63 expression as well as release of cysteinyl 
leukotrienes after in vitro basophil stimulation. No differences in 
transcription factor expression were found in the two groups.
CONCLUSION: Cluster SIT is safe in children. Additionally, our data demonstrated 
an even more rapid induction of specific immune tolerance. Cluster SIT is an 
attractive alternative to conventional up-dosing schedules with fewer 
consultations for the patients.

(c) 2008 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000161585
PMID: 18849616 [Indexed for MEDLINE]